=== Page 1 ===
On Faithfulness and Factuality in Abstractive Summarization
Joshua MaynezShashi NarayanBernd Bohnet Ryan McDonald
Google Research
fjoshuahm,shashinarayan,bohnetbd,ryanmcd g@google.com
Abstract
It is well known that the standard likelihood
training and approximate decoding objectives
in neural text generation models lead to less
human-like responses for open-ended tasks
such as language modeling and story gener-
ation. In this paper we have analyzed limi-
tations of these models for abstractive docu-
ment summarization and found that these mod-
els are highly prone to hallucinate content that
is unfaithful to the input document. We con-
ducted a large scale human evaluation of sev-
eral neural abstractive summarization systems
to better understand the types of hallucinations
they produce. Our human annotators found
substantial amounts of hallucinated content in
all model generated summaries. However, our
analysis does show that pretrained models are
better summarizers not only in terms of raw
metrics, i.e., ROUGE, but also in generating
faithful and factual summaries as evaluated by
humans. Furthermore, we show that textual en-
tailment measures better correlate with faith-
fulness than standard metrics, potentially lead-
ing the way to automatic evaluation metrics as
well as training and decoding criteria.1
1 Introduction
Current state of the art conditional text generation
models accomplish a high level of ﬂuency and co-
herence, mostly thanks to advances in sequence-
to-sequence architectures with attention and copy
(Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015; Gu
et al., 2016), fully attention-based Transformer ar-
chitectures (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2019)
and more recently pretrained language modeling
for natural language understanding (Devlin et al.,
2019; Radford et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2019). There has been a growing interest in
The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.
1Our human annotated summaries for faithfulness and fac-
tuality will be released at https://github.com/google-research-
datasets/xsum hallucination annotations.understanding how maximum likelihood training
and approximate beam-search decoding in these
models lead to less human-like text in open-ended
text generation such as language modeling and
story generation (Holtzman et al., 2020; Welleck
et al., 2020; See et al., 2019). In this paper we
investigate how these models are prone to gener-
ate hallucinated text in conditional text generation ,
speciﬁcally, extreme abstractive document summa-
rization (Narayan et al., 2018a).
Document summarization — the task of produc-
ing a shorter version of a document while preserv-
ing its information content (Mani, 2001; Nenkova
and McKeown, 2011) — requires models to gener-
ate text that is not only human-like but also faith-
ful and/or factual given the document. The exam-
ple in Figure 1 illustrates that the faithfulness and
factuality are yet to be conquered by conditional
text generators. The article describes an event
of “Conservative MP Zac Smith winning the pri-
mary for 2016 London mayoral election ”, but sum-
maries often forge entities (e.g., “Nigel Goldsmith”
or “Zac Goldwin”) or information (e.g., “UKIP
leader Nigel Goldsmith”, “Nigel Goldsmith win-
ning the mayoral election”, “Sadiq Khan being the
former London mayor” or “Zac Goldwin being the
Labour’s candidate”) that are not supported by the
document or are factually wrong. Interestingly, all
summaries are topical and ﬂuent, and perform well
in terms of ROUGE scores (Lin and Hovy, 2003).
We conducted a large-scale human evaluation
of hallucinated content in systems that use Re-
current Neural Network (RNN) (See et al., 2017),
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) (Narayan
et al., 2018a), and Transformers (Radford et al.,
2019; Rothe et al., 2020), as well as human
written summaries for the recently introduced
eXtreme SUMmarization task ( XSUM, Narayan
et al., 2018a). We seek to answer the following
questions: (i) How frequently do abstractive sum-
marizers hallucinate content?; (ii) Do models hal-arXiv:2005.00661v1  [cs.CL]  2 May 2020

=== Page 2 ===
GOLD Zac Goldsmith will contest the 2016 London mayoral election for the Conservatives, it has been
announced.
DOCUMENT :The Richmond Park and North Kingston MP said he was ”honoured” after winning 70% of the 9,227
votes cast using an online primary system.
He beat London Assembly Member Andrew Boff, MEP Syed Kamall and London’s deputy mayor for crime and policing
Stephen Greenhalgh.
Mr Goldsmith ’s main rival is likely to be Labour’s Sadiq Khan .(2 sentences with 59 words are abbreviated here.)
Mr Goldsmith , who was the favourite for the Tory nomination , balloted his constituents earlier this year to seek
permission to stand.
At the very point of his entry into the race for London mayor ,Zac Goldsmith ’s decision revealed two big characteristics.
(5 sentences with 108 words are abbreviated here.)
Mr Goldsmith - who ﬁrst entered Parliament in 2010 - told the BBC’s Daily Politics that he hoped his environmental record
would appeal to Green and Lib Dem voters and he also hoped to ”reach out” to UKIP supporters frustrated with politics as
usual and the UK’s relationship with the EU.
Zac Goldsmith Born in 1975, educated at Eton and the Cambridge Centre for Sixth-form Studies (5 sentences with 76
words are abbreviated here.)
Mr Goldsmith , who has conﬁrmed he would stand down from Parliament if he became mayor, triggering a by-election, said
he wanted to build on current mayor Boris Johnson ’s achievements. (3 sentences with 117 words are abbreviated here.)
Both Mr Khan and Mr Goldsmith oppose a new runway at Heathrow airport, a fact described by the British Chambers of
Commerce as ”depressing”. (1 sentences with 31 words is abbreviated here.)
Current mayor Boris Johnson will step down next year after two terms in ofﬁce. He is also currently the MP for Uxbridge
and South Ruislip, having been returned to Parliament in May.
Some Conservatives have called for an inquiry into the mayoral election process after only 9,227 people voted - compared
with a 87,884 turnout for the Labour contest. (4 sentences with 121 words are abbreviated here.)
PTGEN UKIP leader Nigel Goldsmith has been elected as the new mayor of London to elect
a new Conservative MP.[45.7, 6.1, 28.6]
TCONVS2S Former London mayoral candidate Zac Goldsmith has been chosen to stand in the
London mayoral election.[50.0, 26.7, 37.5]
TRANS2S Former London mayor Sadiq Khan has been chosen as the candidate to be the next
mayor of London.[35.3, 12.5, 23.5]
GPT-T UNED Conservative MP Zac Goldwin’s bid to become Labour’s candidate in the 2016
London mayoral election.[42.4, 25.8, 36.4]
BERTS2S Zac Goldsmith has been chosen to contest the London mayoral election. [66.7, 40.0, 51.9]
Figure 1: Hallucinations in extreme document summarization: the abbreviated article, its gold summary and the
abstractive model generated summaries (P TGEN, See et al. 2017; TC ONV S2S, Narayan et al. 2018a; and, GPT-
TUNED , TRANS2S and B ERTS2S, Rothe et al. 2020) for a news article from the extreme summarization dataset
(Narayan et al., 2018a). The dataset and the abstractive models are described in Section 3 and 4. We also present
the [ ROUGE -1,ROUGE -2,ROUGE -L] F1scores relative to the reference gold summary. Words in red correspond
to hallucinated information whilst words in blue correspond to faithful information.
lucinate by manipulating the information present
in the input document ( intrinsic hallucinations ) or
by adding information not directly inferable from
the input document ( extrinsic hallucinations )?; (iii)
How much hallucinated content is factual , even
when unfaithful?; and (iv) Are there automatic
means of measuring these hallucinations?
Our main conclusions are as follows: First,
intrinsic and extrinsic hallucinations happen fre-
quently – in more than 70% of single-sentence sum-
maries. Second, the majority of hallucinations are
extrinsic, which potentially could be valid abstrac-
tions that use background knowledge. However,
our study found that over 90% of extrinsic halluci-
nations were erroneous. Thus, hallucinations hap-
pen in most summaries and the majority of these
are neither faithful nor factual. Third, models ini-
tialized with pretrained parameters perform best
both on automatic metrics and human judgments of
faithfulness/factuality. Furthermore, they have the
highest percentage of extrinsic hallucinations that
are factual. This suggests that while some studiesargue that large-scale pretrained models are merely
better at learning data-speciﬁc regularities (Niven
and Kao, 2019), at least on in-domain summa-
rization the gains in automatic metrics are real-
ized in observable differences by humans. Fourth,
ROUGE (Lin and Hovy, 2003) and BERTScore
(Zhang et al., 2020) correlates less with faithful-
ness/factuality than metrics derived from automatic
semantic inference systems, speciﬁcally the degree
to which a summary is entailed by the source docu-
ment. This presents an opportunity for improved
automatic evaluation measures as well as model
training and decoding objectives. We show prelim-
inary experiments in this direction.
2 Hallucinations in Summarization
Open-ended generation — the task of generating
text that forms a natural continuation from the input
text — requires the model to hallucinate text; hence
the focus has been to ensure that the model learns
to generate text that is more human-like (i.e., less
repetitive or dull with more content-related words)

=== Page 3 ===
(Holtzman et al., 2020; Welleck et al., 2020; See
et al., 2019). In contrast, tasks such as document
summarization (Nenkova and McKeown, 2011; See
et al., 2017; Paulus et al., 2018) and data-to-text
generation (Lebret et al., 2016; Wiseman et al.,
2017) which are not open-ended, require models to
be factual and/or faithful to the source text.
Despite recent improvements in conditional
text generation, most summarization systems are
trained to maximize the log-likelihood of the ref-
erence summary at the word-level, which does not
necessarily reward models for being faithful. More-
over, models are usually agnostic to the noises or
artifacts of the training data, such as reference diver-
gence, making them vulnerable to hallucinations
(Kryscinski et al., 2019a; Wiseman et al., 2017;
Dhingra et al., 2019). Thus, models can gener-
ate texts that are not consistent with the input, yet
would likely have reasonable model log-likelihood.
2.1 Intrinsic and Extrinsic Hallucinations
Given a document Dand its abstractive summary
S, we try to identify all hallucinations in Swith re-
spect to the content of D, regardless of the quality
of the summary. In this work, we deﬁne a summary
as being hallucinated if it has a span(s) wi: : : w i+j,
ji, that is not supported by the input document.
To distinguish hallucinations further in the context
of a document and a summary, we categorize hallu-
cinations by the information source as intrinsic and
extrinsic hallucinations. Note, paraphrases or any
information that can be inferred from the document
are not categorized as hallucinations.
Intrinsic hallucinations are consequences of
synthesizing content using the information present
in the input document. For example, in Fig-
ure 1, “Former London mayoral candidate” in the
TCONV S2S abstract and “Former London mayor”
in the TRANS2S abstract are hallucinations of in-
trinsic nature; both use terms or concepts from the
document but misrepresent information from the
document, making them unfaithful to the document.
The article does not conﬁrm if “Zac Goldsmith”
was a “Former London mayoral candidate” or if
“Sadiq Khan” was a “Former London mayor”. One
may suspect that a model with poor input docu-
ment representation will fail to do document level
inference, often required for abstraction, and will
be vulnerable to such errors.
Extrinsic hallucinations are model generations
that ignore the source material altogether. For ex-
ample, in Figure 1, “Nigel” in the PTGENabstract
and “2016” in both GOLD andGPT-T UNED areextrinsic hallucinations; these terms are not intro-
duced in the document. A model with a poorly-
informed decoder and that is agnostic to the di-
vergence issue between the source and target texts
(Wiseman et al., 2017; Dhingra et al., 2019), will
function more as an open-ended language model
and will be prone to extrinsic hallucinations.
2.2 Factual Hallucinations in Summarization
A summary Sof a document Dcontains a factual
hallucination if it contains information not found
inDthat is factually correct. Factual hallucina-
tions may be composed of intrinsic hallucinations
or extrinsic hallucinations.
By deﬁnition, abstractive summaries are writ-
ten to preserve the salient information in the input
document, but they are expressed in the words of
the summary author as opposed to the input docu-
ment author (Nenkova and McKeown, 2011). As
such, it is natural to construct summaries that inte-
grate with the author’s background knowledge (van
Dijk and Kintsch, 1978; Brown and Day, 1983).
Such knowledge integration can also be desirable
in real world applications. For instance, an en-
gaging sports report will reﬂect an understanding
of the game to provide color and context. An-
other example is audience-targeted summarization
where a good summary will reﬂect understanding
of both the article domain and the desired audience.
Nonetheless, there is no consensus in the research
community if the summary should be faithful (with-
out any hallucinations) to the input document or if
there is tolerance for factual hallucinations.
Recent deep learning approaches to abstractive
summarization naturally learn to integrate knowl-
edge from the training data while generating an
abstractive summary for a document (See et al.,
2017; Gehrmann et al., 2018). More advanced pre-
trained text generators (Radford et al., 2018, 2019;
Dong et al., 2019; Song et al., 2019; Khandelwal
et al., 2019; Rothe et al., 2020) are even better at
capturing world knowledge as they are informed
by a vast amount of background text. This can be
observed in the example shown in Figure 1 as the
input document does not mention that the discussed
“London mayoral election” is from “2016”; but the
abstract generated by the pretrained text generator
GPT-T UNED correctly predicts this information
similar to the human-authored abstract.2
2Despite the correct extrinsic hallucination (“2016 ”), the
GPT-T UNED abstract overall is still not factual due to the
incorrect extrinsic hallucination in “Conservative MP Zac
Goldwin.” There is no Conservative MP named Zac Goldwin.

=== Page 4 ===
In this paper we stand in favour of the asser-
tion that abstractive systems may integrate with the
background knowledge to generate rich and mean-
ingful summaries. More concretely, “ hallucina-
tions in summarization are acceptable if they lead
to better summaries that are factual with respect
to the document and the associated background
knowledge .” This assumption also allows us to
assess the capability of recent neural models to in-
tegrate with the background knowledge to generate
factual abstracts (see Section 5.3).
3 Extreme Document Summarization
We focus on the recently introduced extreme sum-
marization dataset ( XSUM, Narayan et al., 2018a)3
which comprises 226,711 British Broadcasting Cor-
poration (BBC) articles paired with their single-
sentence summaries, provided by the journalists
writing the articles. The dataset is split into three
subsets: training (90%, 204,045), validation (5%,
11,332), and test (5%, 11,334) sets. All models in
x4 trained to generate abstractive summaries are
trained and evaluated using this standard split, pro-
vided by the authors.
We choose to focus our study on extreme summa-
rization for the following reasons: First, this task
aims to create a single-sentence summary of a news
article; these shorter summaries are relatively eas-
ier to annotate and analyze than longer summaries
such as story highlights from the CNN/Dailymail
dataset (Hermann et al., 2015) or abstracts from the
NY Times (Sandhaus, 2008) or the WikiSum (Liu
et al., 2018) dataset. Secondly, the gold summary
in the extreme summarization dataset is an intro-
ductory sentence prefacing each article. By virtue
of this property, the extreme summarization task is
not amenable to extractive strategies and requires
an abstractive modeling approach. Hence, it pro-
vides us a better benchmark to assess abstractive
models’ abilities to produce abstractions which are
faithful and factual. Finally, since we conclude that
hallucination is a problem on this dataset, then we
can safely conclude it is a problem for summariza-
tion datasets with longer summaries, as modeling
longer-distance dependencies and discourse struc-
tures make the task harder.
4 Abstractive Summaries
We evaluate summaries from RNN, CNN and
Transformer-based state-of-the-art abstractive sum-
marization methods and the reference human writ-
3https://github.com/EdinburghNLP/XSumten summaries. See the Appendix for hyperparam-
eter and decoding details for all models.
Human Written Reference Summaries. The
single-sentence summaries contained in the ex-
treme summarization dataset ( XSUM) are also eval-
uated as part of this study. These summaries were
written by journalists as introductions to the news
articles they precede. These summaries, therefore,
often have true additional information not found
in the document. Such divergence issue between
source and target is not uncommon in conditional
text generation (Kryscinski et al., 2019a; Wiseman
et al., 2017; Dhingra et al., 2019).
RNN-based Seq2Seq. We use the Pointer-
Generator model ( PTGEN) introduced by See et al.
(2017), an RNN-based attention-based sequence
to sequence model which not only generates from
the target vocabulary but can copy words from the
source text.
Topic-aware Convolutional Seq2Seq. The
Topic-aware Convolutional Sequence to Sequence
model ( TCONVS2S) introduced by Narayan
et al. (2018a) is an abstractive system which
is conditioned on the article’s topics and based
entirely on Convolutional Neural Networks
(Gehring et al., 2017). TCONV S2S is better
suited for extreme summarization, as convolution
layers capture long-range dependencies between
words in the document more effectively than
RNNs. Simultaneously, the convolutional encoder
associates each word with a topic vector, capturing
whether it is representative of the document’s
content.
Transformer-based Abstractive Methods. We
experiment with three Transformer-based model
variants, all of which have 12 layers, a hidden size
of 768, ﬁlter size of 3072, and 12 attention heads.
GPT-T UNED : Radford et al. (2019) proposed
Transformer-based Generative Pre-Trained (GPT)
language models that can generate high quality text
in open-ended generation setups. The proposed
decoder-only architecture for language modeling
can be easily adapted to abstractive summarization
where the model ﬁrst sees the document and, given
a prompt, such as TL;DR;, generates its summary.
OurGPT-T UNED is warm-started with a publicly
available GPT checkpoint (Radford et al., 2019),
but ﬁne-tuned with supervised training on the ex-
treme summarization dataset.
TRANS2S and BERTS2S:TRANS2S and
BERTS2S are sequence to sequence models

=== Page 5 ===
ModelsHuman Eval Test Set
R1 R2 RL BERTScore
PTGEN 30.01 9.38 23.76 74.30
TCONV S2S 30.89 11.47 25.80 75.23
TRANS2S 32.28 11.66 24.65 75.69
GPT-T UNED 21.82 4.72 16.28 70.35
BERTS2S 38.42 16.96 31.27 78.85
Table 1: ROUGE and BERTScore F 1scores for non-
pretrained (the top block) and pretrained (the bottom
block) models reported on the XSum dataset. These re-
sults are on the sampled human evaluation (500 items)
dataset. The best results are boldfaced .
where both encoder and decoder are composed
of Transformer layers (Vaswani et al., 2017;
Rothe et al., 2020). All weights in TRANS2S
are randomly initialized, but in BERTS2S, both
encoder and decoder are initialized with the
BERT-Base checkpoints (Devlin et al., 2019),
with parameter sharing between the encoder and
decoder, following Rothe et al. (2020). The only
variable that is initialized randomly is the encoder-
decoder attention in BERTS2S. Both models are
then trained on the extreme summarization dataset.
5 Experiments and Results
The main focus of this work is not to propose a so-
lution to hallucination related issues, but to achieve
a better understanding of hallucinations in abstrac-
tive summarization through their human assess-
ment. We randomly sampled 500 articles from the
test set to facilitate our study. Using the full test
set was unfeasible given its size and the cost of hu-
man judgments. We have trained annotators (ﬂuent
in English) speciﬁcally for our assessment. Our
annotators went through two pilot studies to have
a better understanding of intrinsic and extrinsic
hallucinations, and factuality of summaries. Doc-
uments used in the pilot studies were not used in
the ﬁnal annotation. We also report on ROUGE
(Lin and Hovy, 2003) scores, BERTScore (Zhang
et al., 2020) and semantic inference metric such
as textual entailment (Pasunuru and Bansal, 2018;
Welleck et al., 2019; Falke et al., 2019; Kryscinski
et al., 2019b) and question answering (Arumae and
Liu, 2019; Wang et al., 2020).
5.1 Automatic Evaluation of Summaries
ROUGE (Lin and Hovy, 2003) provides a means
to quickly assess a model’s ability to generate sum-
maries closer to human authored summaries. We
report on ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-2 for informa-
tiveness and ROUGE-L, for ﬂuency. Like ROUGE,
BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020) computes a sim-
ilarity score for each token in the candidate sum-
Figure 2: Human assessment of a system generated
summary for the article in Figure 1. The annotation
user interface is shown as it was shown to raters.
mary with each token in the reference summary.
However, instead of exact matches, it computes
token similarity using contextual embeddings. Re-
sults are presented in Table 1.
For both cases, the pretrained encoder-decoder
architecture BERTS2S performed far superior to
any other randomly initialized models, such as PT-
GEN,TCONVS2S andTRANS2S, and the decoder-
only architecture GPT-T UNED . The differences be-
tween PTGEN,TCONVS2S andTRANS2S are not
signiﬁcant; all other differences are signiﬁcant.4
ROUGE and BERTScore are indicators of infor-
mativeness of summaries but they are not sufﬁcient
metrics to assess the overall quality of summaries.
This becomes evident from our human assessments
in the following sections where we employ human
annotators to evaluate summaries generated with
PTGEN,TCONV S2S,TRANS2S andBERTS2S,
and the human authored summaries. We excluded
GPT-T UNED abstracts from our study after their
poor performance on the automatic measures.
5.2 Assessment of Hallucinations
In this assessment, human annotators were pre-
sented an article and a single-sentence summary
for the article. They were stringently told to only
assess the hallucinations in the summary and to
not confuse their assessment with the quality of
the summary. For summaries containing hallucina-
tions, annotators were tasked with (i) identifying
those text spans that were unfaithful to the arti-
cle and (ii) for each text span, annotating whether
the hallucination was intrinsic or extrinsic. We
elicited judgments from three different annotators
for each of 2500 (500x5) document-summary pairs.
Figure 2 shows an example assessment of a sum-
mary of an article from Figure 1. Results from
the full assessment are shown in Table 2, which
shows the percentage of documents per system that
were annotated as faithful or hallucinated (faithful
= 100 - hallucinated). The Appendix provides inter-
annotator agreement of hallucinations as well as
hallucinated span characteristics.
Extrinsic Hallucination due to Divergence be-
tween Source and Target. Our results con-
4Pairwise comparisons between all models using a one-
way ANOV A with post-hoc Tukey HSD tests; p <0:01.

=== Page 6 ===
ModelsHallucinatedFaith. +Fact.I E I [E
PTGEN 19.9 63.3 75.3 24.7 27.3
TCONV S2S 17.7 71.5 78.5 21.5 26.9
TRANS2S 19.1 68.1 79.3 20.7 25.3
BERTS2S 16.9 64.1 73.1 26.9 34.7
GOLD 7.4 73.1 76.9 23.1 —
Table 2: Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Hallucinations. The
numbers in “Hallucinated” columns show the percent-
age of summaries where at least one word was anno-
tated by all three annotators as an intrinsic (I) or extrin-
sic (E) hallucination. When a summary is not marked
with any hallucination, it is “faithful” (100 - I [E), col-
umn “Faith.”. The ﬁnal “+Fact.” column shows the
total percentage of faithful and/or factual summaries,
which includes all faithful summaries plus the percent-
age of non-faithful summaries annotated by all three an-
notators as factual. Higher numbers for faithful/factual
and lower numbers for hallucinations are boldfaced .
ﬁrmed that the BBC gold summaries often have ex-
trinsic hallucinations due to the dataset artifact that
gold summaries are introductory sentences pref-
acing each article. It was not surprising that most
models also had signiﬁcant extrinsic hallucinations.
Intrinsic Hallucination is Also Common in Ab-
stractive Summaries. Gold summaries can also
display intrinsic hallucinations. For example, a
news article could describe an event related to
“Barack Obama” and “the ofﬁce of the President of
the United States” without inferring that “Obama
is the President of the United States.” A journalist
with the knowledge of the event in the article could
write a summary stating “President Obama.”
However, the percentage of system summaries
with intrinsic hallucination was much higher than
in gold summaries (7.4% vs others). This phe-
nomenon particularly revealed the models’ ten-
dency to misrepresent information in the document
due to the lack of document-level understanding
and inference. The copy mechanism in PTGENis
good at copying from the source (showing the least
percentage of extrinsic hallucination of 63.3%), but
the mechanism lacks the inference capability and is
prone to generate a summary that is not supported
by the document (19.9% intrinsic hallucination).
TRANS2S showed similar performance to PTGEN
and ranked second worst. The BERTS2S showed
the least number of intrinsic hallucination (16.9%)
among all four abstractive systems.
Pretraining Improves Faithfulness. Hallucina-
tions do not result from the artifacts in the training
data only, but also due to model shortcomings. The
PTGENmodel with the copy mechanism (Gu et al.,
2016; See et al., 2017) had the lowest extrinsichallucination (63.3%), but BERTS2S reported the
highest number of faithful summaries. It appears
thatBERTS2S is overall most conservative among
all four abstractive systems while getting closer to
reference summaries in terms of ROUGE. The pre-
training prepares BertS2S to be more aware of the
domain of the document and less prone to language
model vulnerabilities. Consequently, BertS2S is
more conﬁdent in predicting tokens from the docu-
ment than TranS2S, hence, improving faithfulness.
5.3 Assessment of Factual Hallucinations.
Hallucinations are not necessarily erroneous. In our
second human assessment, we measured to what ex-
tent this is the case. Our annotators were presented
a single-sentence summary with hallucinations and
were asked to assess whether it is true or false. To
better explain the context of the summary, annota-
tors were made available the source document as
well as the external resources such as Wikipedia
or Google Search. The source document can be
particularly important for generic summaries to bet-
ter understand context. External resources assisted
the evaluators to validate grounded facts in public
knowledge bases.
Annotators were expected to validate the sum-
mary by looking for supporting evidence for the
information found on the summary. If information
in the summary contradicts the document, then the
summary is not factual. If supporting evidence is
found for all the information, then the summary is
factual. The document is not useful when the sum-
mary has information that is neither supported nor
contradicted in the article. For example, the sum-
mary in Figure 2 mentions “Conservative MP Zac
Goldwin” which can not be veriﬁed from the article
in Figure 1. Here, annotators could use Wikipedia
or Google Search to check that there had not been
a Conservative MP named Zac Goldwin who tried
to change their party and become a Labour’s candi-
date in the 2016 London mayoral election.
We dropped the human authored gold summaries
from this evaluation; they were presumably factual.
We also dropped the abstracts that were faithful
to their input documents from the previous study.
Finally, there were 1869 document-summary pairs
where the summaries were marked with at least
one intrinsic or extrinsic hallucination. We elicited
judgments from three different annotators for each
of them. Results from this assessment are also pre-
sented in Table 2 (see the column labelled “+Fact.”)
along with the hallucination assessment.

=== Page 7 ===
Pretraining Helps Generating Factual Sum-
maries. In total, 34.7% of the BERTS2S ab-
stracts were faithful (26.9%) and/or factual
(+7.8%). This is 7.4% absolute better than the
next-best model ( PTGEN). The number of unfaith-
ful yet factual summaries for BERTS2S, 7.8%, was
also the highest. In fact, for extrinsic hallucina-
tions, even though PTGENhallucinates less than
BERTS2S (63.3% vs. 64.1%), 6.6% of BERTS2S
hallucinations were factual, compared to 2.2% of
PTGEN.5Thus, if we consider factual hallucina-
tions to be valid, this means that even for extrinsic
cases, B ERTS2S hallucinates the least.
The superior performance of BERTS2S is most
likely due to its exposure to vast amount of text
through pretraining, allowing it to integrate back-
ground knowledge with generation. Even so, over
90% of B ERTS2S hallucinations are erroneous.
Finally, we carried out pairwise comparisons be-
tween all models (using a one-way ANOV A with
post-hoc Tukey HSD tests; p < 0:01). For intrin-
sic hallucinations (the second column in Table 2),
GOLD is signiﬁcantly different from all other sys-
tems. For extrinsic hallucinations (the third col-
umn in Table 2), there were signiﬁcant differences
between PTGENand TCONV S2S,PTGENand
GOLD, and, BERTS2S andGOLD. For factual-
ity, the differences between PTGEN,TCONV S2S,
and T RANS2S were insigniﬁcant.
5.4 Automatic Measures for Hallucinations
Summaries are a proxy for their source documents
under the assumption that they highlight the most
important content. With this assumption, we fur-
ther studied the extent to which the hallucinated
content can be measured by semantic inference
related measures, such as textual entailment and
question answering.
Textual Entailment. We trained an entailment
classiﬁer by ﬁnetuning a BERT-Large pretrained
model (Devlin et al., 2019) on the Multi-NLI
dataset (Williams et al., 2018). We calculated
the entailment probability score between the docu-
ment and its abstractive summaries. Note that this
entailment classiﬁer is not optimal for the BBC
article-summary pairs; the Multi-NLI dataset con-
tains sentence-sentence pairs.
Ideally a summary should entail the document
or perhaps be neutral to the document, but never
contradict the document. As can be seen in Table 3,
theBERTS2S abstracts showed the least number of
5See Appendix for full results.ModelsTextual EntailmentQAentail. neut. cont.
PTGEN 38.4 34.4 27.2 20.2
TCONV S2S 29.6 37.4 33.0 19.9
TRANS2S 34.6 39.8 25.6 22.4
BERTS2S 41.8 37.8 20.4 23.0
GOLD 32.8 47.2 20.0 19.3
Table 3: Textual entailment and question answering
(QA) based measures for summary evaluation. For en-
tailment, we show the percentage of times a summary
entails (entail.) the document, is neutral (neut.) to the
document and contradicts (cont.) the document. For
QA, we report the percentage of questions that were
correctly answered by a system. The highest numbers
for entail., neut. and QA, and the lowest number for
cont. are boldfaced.
contradictions compared to other system-generated
abstracts and was at par with the GOLD summaries.
Similar to the performance on extrinsic halluci-
nation in Table 2, the TCONV S2S abstracts also
displayed the highest number of contradictions. In-
terestingly, the GOLD summaries are more neutral
to their documents, whereas the BERTS2S sum-
maries are more entailed by their documents. This
is probably due to the nature of the data and that
journalists tend to add color and have a high num-
ber of extrinsic (but valid) hallucinations.
Question Answering. QA frameworks have
been used to assess or promote summary infor-
mativeness (Narayan et al., 2018b; Arumae and
Liu, 2019). We adapted the QA framework to as-
sess hallucination in model generated summaries;
a faithful model will generate a summary that only
has information that is supported by its document.
Under this assumption, any question answerable
by the summary should also be answerable by the
source.
Given an abstractive summary, we used the
round-trip consistency method of Alberti et al.
(2019), which combines question generation and
answer extraction models to generate synthetic
question-answer pairs. For the 500 document-
summary pairs, we generated 731, 708, 720,
725 and 820 question-answer pairs for PTGEN,
TCONVS2S,TRANS2S,BERTS2S andGOLD, re-
spectively. Finally, we used a machine reading
comprehension model to answer these questions
using the document as context. As in Alberti et al.
(2019), we trained all models: question generation,
answer extraction and reading comprehension mod-
els; using a BERT-Base pretrained model (Devlin
et al., 2019) ﬁnetuned on the Natural Questions
dataset (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019).
Similar to textual entailment results, the

=== Page 8 ===
PTGEN Leeds United fought back from 2-0 down
to beat Huddersﬁeld town in the ﬁrst round
of the EFL cup. ( Q:What team did Leeds
United beat in the ﬁrst round of the EFL cup? ,
A:Huddersﬁeld town )
TCONVS2S A coal mine in South Yorkshire has collapsed
as a result of the loss of a coal mine. ( Q:
What type of mine has collapsed? ,A:Coal )
TRANS2S Star Wars actor James Davis said he was
“locked in a caravan” and had his caravan
stolen during a break-in. ( Q:Who said he
was locked in a caravan? ,A:Davis )
Figure 3: Sample of question-answer pairs generated
from hallucinated summaries that are correctly an-
swered by their source articles. Highlighted spans in
the summaries are marked as extrinsic or intrinsic hal-
lucinations by our annotators.
Metric Faithful Factual
ROUGE -1 0.197 0.125
ROUGE -2 0.162 0.095
ROUGE -L 0.162 0.113
BERTScore 0.190 0.116
QA 0.044 0.027
Entailment 0.431 0.264
Table 4: Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcient ( jrsj) of dif-
ferent metrics with faithful and factual annotations.
BERTS2S abstracts were the most faithful to their
source documents in terms of question answering.
TheGOLD abstracts were the least accurate due to
a high number of extrinsic hallucination in them.
Spearman’s Correlation. We estimate Spear-
man’s correlation coefﬁcients of different metrics
with the faithful and factual human scores (see
Table 4). We found that the textual entailment
scores are best correlated with both faithful (mod-
erate, 0:40 jrsj  0:59) and factual (weak,
0:20jrsj0:39) human scores. Comparatively,
ROUGE -based metrics and BERTScore have very
weak correlation, our ﬁndings are consistent with
the recent studies (Goodrich et al., 2019; Kryscin-
ski et al., 2019a; Wang et al., 2020). Surprisingly,
the question answering scores showed a very weak
correlation ( 0:0jrsj0:19) with faithful and
factual human scores. We hypothesize that this
is due to a compounding of errors where (i) the
question generator is used to generate questions
from the systems’ generated abstracts, instead of
human-written text on which they were trained, (ii)
the question generator is susceptible to generate
questions with hallucinated content when fed in
with hallucinated summaries, and (iii) our assump-
tion that a summary is faithful if the answers from
the source and the summary match, is rather poor
for extreme summarization. We demonstrate these
issues in Figure 3. Irrespective of questions with
hallucinated content, our reading comprehensionModels R1 R2 RL Faith. +Fact.
BERTS2S 38.42 16.96 31.27 26.9 34.7
ENTAIL 35.93 14.02 28.87 31.5 38.6
!FAITH 37.31 15.21 30.12 31.7 38.8
Table 5: ROUGE and faithfulness/factuality scores for
BERTS2S plus systems that use textual entailment as a
criteria or ﬁne-tuned on faithful annotations.
model can fortuitously answer them correctly from
their source articles. Better ways of generating
questions (Narayan et al., 2020) and measuring fac-
tual consistency may alleviate some of these issues
(Wang et al., 2020).
5.5 Model Selection with Entailment
Our study suggests that entailment could be used
as an automatic measure for faithfulness. However,
we should point out that this measure is reference-
less. Thus, it can easily be gamed, i.e., the ﬁrst sen-
tence of any source document is always entailed by
the whole document. Because of this, entailment-
based measures for evaluation need to be coupled
with reference-based measures like ROUGE .
However, one major advantage of the measure
being reference-less is that we can use it as a model
selection objective or during decoding. We tested
the former. Speciﬁcally, we used the probability
that a summary is entailed by a document as a selec-
tion criteria to select a summary between four can-
didates generated by systems evaluated: PTGEN,
TCONV S2S,TRANS2S, and BERTS2S. Results
are shown in the ENTAIL row of Table 5. We can
see that indeed this is a strong metric to optimize
towards if we want faithful summaries - almost 5%
absolute better. There is a trade-off in terms of
ROUGE , but this model must select amongst 4 sys-
tems, 3 of which have signiﬁcantly lower ROUGE
than the best model.
A further experiment is to train a model explic-
itly to predict faithfulness. In order to do this, we
further ﬁne-tuned the entailment model using the
‘faithful’ annotations generated during our evalua-
tion. For all summary-document pairs marked as
‘faithful’, we set the associated class to ‘entailment’,
otherwise we set it to ‘neutral’. This allowed for us
to also ﬁne-tune the last classiﬁcation layers taking
advantage of the correlation between ‘entailment’
and ‘faithfulness’. Results using 5-fold cross val-
idation are shown in the ENTAIL!FAITH row of
Table 5. We see here that indeed this does improve
the ability to select faithful summaries from a set
of candidates, though slightly. We would expect
to see larger gains with more training data. How-
ever, this model is signiﬁcantly better than ENTAIL

=== Page 9 ===
onROUGE -based metrics and seems like a good
balance between ROUGE and better faithfulness.
6 Related Work
Following the Document Understanding Confer-
ence (DUC; Dang, 2005), a majority of work has
focused on evaluating the content and the linguistic
quality of summaries (Nenkova, 2005). Most pop-
ular among them is the automatic metric ROUGE
(Lin and Hovy, 2003) that measures the unigram
and bigram overlap (ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-2)
as a proxy for assessing informativeness and the
longest common subsequence (ROUGE-L), for ﬂu-
ency. ROUGE, however, can be misleading when
used as the only means to assess the informative-
ness of summaries (Schluter, 2017). Hence, the
ROUGE score is often complemented with subjec-
tive human assessment of summaries. More objec-
tive measures have been proposed to improve agree-
ment among human annotators. Pyramid method
(Nenkova and Passonneau, 2004) requires sum-
maries to be annotated by experts for salient infor-
mation. Narayan et al. (2018a,b) used a question-
answering based approach where a summary is
used as context to answer questions which were
written based on its reference summary. Hardy
et al. (2019) proposed a reference-less approach
where a summary is assessed against the source
document, highlighted with its pertinent content.
There has not been much work on evaluating
faithfulness and truthfulness of abstractive sum-
maries. The automatic evaluation such as ROUGE
and the human evaluation of saliency and linguistic
quality of summaries are not sufﬁcient due to the
complex nature of the task. Recently, Chen and
Bansal (2018) asked human annotators to assess
the summary relevance measuring both the saliency
and the presence of contradictory/unrelated infor-
mation. Dhingra et al. (2019) proposed a new au-
tomatic metric, PARENT, for data-to-text gener-
ation (Lebret et al., 2016; Wiseman et al., 2017)
which aligns n-grams from the reference and gen-
erated texts to the source table to measure the accu-
racy of n-grams that are entailed from the source
table. Goodrich et al. (2019) proposed a model-
based automatic metric to assess the faithfulness of
Wikipedia summaries; they trained an end-to-end
model to extract a complete set of OpenIE-style
(Banko et al., 2007) facts from both the source
text and the generated summary. The summary
is faithful if it is precise in generating facts from
the source text. In our experiments with OpenIE-
based measures, we found that they are not suitedfor evaluating extreme summarization models; all
models perform poorly on these metrics without
any signiﬁcant differences. Like ours, few recent
works (some in parallel) have explored natural
language inference and question answering mod-
els to detect factual consistency in generated text
(Welleck et al., 2019; Falke et al., 2019; Kryscin-
ski et al., 2019b; Wang et al., 2020). In line with
our ﬁndings, Falke et al. (2019) observed that the
BERT-based NLI models substantially improved
summaries reranking in terms of their correctness.
Kryscinski et al. (2019b) proposed an NLI-based
fact checking model that is trained on a dataset
tailored for detecting factual inconsistencies in gen-
erated text. Wang et al. (2020) proposed a question
answering and generation based automatic evalu-
ation protocol that is designed to identify factual
inconsistencies in a generated summary. Future
work will likely investigate better ways of gener-
ating questions and measuring factual consistency
to address poor correlation with faithfulness and
factuality annotations.
Finally, others have used reinforcement learn-
ing to improve informativeness and reduce con-
tradictory information in abstractive summaries,
e.g., Pasunuru and Bansal (2018) used a textual
entailment-based reward and Arumae and Liu
(2019), a question-answering based reward. How-
ever, these approaches don’t evaluate if these re-
wards improve faithfulness of summaries.
7 Conclusion
We conducted a large-scale study of hallucinations
in abstractive document summarization. We found
that (i) tackling hallucination is a critical challenge
for abstractive summarization, perhaps the most
critical, (ii) NLU-driven pretraining in neural text
generators is key to generate informative, coherent,
faithful and factual abstracts, but it is still far from
solving the problem; and (iii) measures such as
ROUGE or BERTScore will not be sufﬁcient when
studying the problem; semantic inference-based
automatic measures are better representations of
true summarization quality.
Acknowledgments
We thank Ratish Puduppully, Yova Kementched-
jhieva, Ankur Parikh, Peter Liu, Slav Petrov, the
reviewers and the action editor for invaluable feed-
back. The hard work of Muqthar Mohammad,
Mohd Majeed and Ashwin Kakarla made our hu-
man annotation possible.

=== Page 10 ===
References
Chris Alberti, Daniel Andor, Emily Pitler, Jacob De-
vlin, and Michael Collins. 2019. Synthetic QA cor-
pora generation with roundtrip consistency. In Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 6168–
6173, Florence, Italy.
Kristjan Arumae and Fei Liu. 2019. Guiding extractive
summarization with question-answering rewards. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,
pages 2566–2577, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations , San
Diego, CA, USA.
Michele Banko, Michael J. Cafarella, Stephen Soder-
land, Matt Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 2007.
Open information extraction from the web. In Pro-
ceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcal Intelligence , pages 2670–2676, Hyder-
abad, India.
Ann L. Brown and Jeanne D. Day. 1983. Macrorules
for summarizing texts: The development of exper-
tise. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Be-
haviour , 22(1):1–14.
Yen-Chun Chen and Mohit Bansal. 2018. Fast abstrac-
tive summarization with reinforce-selected sentence
rewriting. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 675–686, Melbourne, Australia.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Car-
bonell, Quoc Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2019.
Transformer-XL: Attentive language models beyond
a ﬁxed-length context. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics , pages 2978–2988, Florence, Italy.
Hoa Trang Dang. 2005. Overview of DUC 2005. In
Proceedings of the Document Understanding Con-
ference , pages 1–12.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies , pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Min-
nesota.
Bhuwan Dhingra, Manaal Faruqui, Ankur Parikh,
Ming-Wei Chang, Dipanjan Das, and William Co-
hen. 2019. Handling divergent reference texts when
evaluating table-to-text generation. In Proceedings
of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , pages 4884–4895, Flo-
rence, Italy.Teun A. van Dijk and Walter Kintsch. 1978. Cognitive
psychology and discourse: Recalling and summariz-
ing stories. In Wolfgang U. Dressler, editor, Current
Trends in Textlinguistics , pages 61–80.
Li Dong, Nan Yang, Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Xi-
aodong Liu, Yu Wang, Jianfeng Gao, Ming Zhou,
and Hsiao-Wuen Hon. 2019. Uniﬁed language
model pre-training for natural language understand-
ing and generation. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 32 , pages 13063–13075.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Tobias Falke, Leonardo F. R. Ribeiro, Prasetya Ajie
Utama, Ido Dagan, and Iryna Gurevych. 2019.
Ranking generated summaries by correctness: An in-
teresting but challenging application for natural lan-
guage inference. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics , pages 2214–2220, Florence, Italy.
Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, De-
nis Yarats, and Yann N. Dauphin. 2017. Convolu-
tional sequence to sequence learning. In Proceed-
ings of the 34th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning , volume 70, pages 1243–1252, Syd-
ney, NSW, Australia.
Sebastian Gehrmann, Yuntian Deng, and Alexander
Rush. 2018. Bottom-up abstractive summarization.
InProceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
4098–4109, Brussels, Belgium.
Ben Goodrich, Vinay Rao, Peter J. Liu, and Moham-
mad Saleh. 2019. Assessing the factual accuracy
of generated text. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining , pages 166–175, New
York, NY , USA.
Jiatao Gu, Zhengdong Lu, Hang Li, and Victor O.K.
Li. 2016. Incorporating copying mechanism in
sequence-to-sequence learning. In Proceedings of
the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 1631–1640, Berlin,
Germany.
Hardy, Shashi Narayan, and Andreas Vlachos. 2019.
HighRES: Highlight-based reference-less evaluation
of summarization. In Proceedings of the 57th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 3381–3392, Florence, Italy.
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tom ´aˇs Koˇcisk´y, Edward Grefen-
stette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Suleyman,
and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching machines to read
and comprehend. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 28 , pages 1693–1701. Cur-
ran Associates, Inc.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin
Choi. 2020. The curious case of neural text degener-
ation. In Proceedings of the 8th International Con-
ference on Learning Representations , Virtual Con-
ference, Formerly Addis Ababa Ethiopia.

=== Page 11 ===
Urvashi Khandelwal, Kevin Clark, Dan Jurafsky, and
Lukasz Kaiser. 2019. Sample efﬁcient text sum-
marization using a single pre-trained transformer.
CoRR , abs/1905.08836.
Wojciech Kryscinski, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Bryan Mc-
Cann, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2019a.
Neural text summarization: A critical evaluation.
InProceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing and
the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing , pages 540–551, Hong Kong,
China.
Wojciech Kryscinski, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong,
and Richard Socher. 2019b. Evaluating the fac-
tual consistency of abstractive text summarization.
CoRR , abs/1910.12840.
Taku Kudo and John Richardson. 2018. Sentencepiece:
A simple and language independent subword tok-
enizer and detokenizer for neural text processing.
CoRR , abs/1808.06226.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Red-
ﬁeld, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Al-
berti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob De-
vlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones,
Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai,
Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019.
Natural questions: A benchmark for question an-
swering research. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 7:453–466.
J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
Biometrics , 33(1):159–174.
R´emi Lebret, David Grangier, and Michael Auli. 2016.
Neural text generation from structured data with
application to the biography domain. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing , pages 1203–1213,
Austin, Texas.
Chin Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. 2003. Automatic eval-
uation of summaries using n-gram co-occurrence
statistics. In Proceedings of the 2003 Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 150–157.
Peter J. Liu, Mohammad Saleh, Etienne Pot, Ben
Goodrich, Ryan Sepassi, Lukasz Kaiser, and Noam
Shazeer. 2018. Generating wikipedia by summariz-
ing long sequences. In Proceedings of the 6th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations ,
Vancouver Canada.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach. CoRR , abs/1907.11692.Inderjeet Mani. 2001. Automatic summarization , vol-
ume 3. John Benjamins Publishing.
Shashi Narayan, Shay B. Cohen, and Mirella Lapata.
2018a. Don’t give me the details, just the summary!
Topic-aware convolutional neural networks for ex-
treme summarization. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 1797–1807, Brussels, Bel-
gium.
Shashi Narayan, Shay B. Cohen, and Mirella Lapata.
2018b. Ranking sentences for extractive summariza-
tion with reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies , pages 1747–1759,
New Orleans, Louisiana.
Shashi Narayan, Gonc ¸alo Simoes, Ji Ma, Hannah
Craighead, and Ryan T. McDonald. 2020. QURI-
OUS: Question generation pretraining for text gen-
eration. CoRR , abs/2004.11026.
Ani Nenkova. 2005. Automatic Text Summarization
of Newswire: Lessons Learned from the Document
Understanding Conference. In Proceedings of the
20th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence -
Volume 3 , pages 1436–1441.
Ani Nenkova and Kathleen McKeown. 2011. Auto-
matic summarization. Foundations and Trends in
Information Retrieval , 5(2–3):103–233.
Ani Nenkova and Rebecca Passonneau. 2004. Evaluat-
ing content selection in summarization: The Pyra-
mid method. In Proceedings of the Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 145–152, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
Timothy Niven and Hung-Yu Kao. 2019. Probing neu-
ral network comprehension of natural language ar-
guments. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 4658–4664, Florence, Italy.
Ramakanth Pasunuru and Mohit Bansal. 2018. Multi-
reward reinforced summarization with saliency and
entailment. In Proceedings of the 2018 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies , pages 646–653, New Orleans,
Louisiana.
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
2018. A deep reinforced model for abstractive sum-
marization. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Learning Representations , Vancou-
ver, BC, Canada.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and
Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training. Technical re-
port.

=== Page 12 ===
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. Techni-
cal report.
Sascha Rothe, Shashi Narayan, and Aliaksei Severyn.
2020. Leveraging pre-trained checkpoints for se-
quence generation tasks. To appear in Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, abs/1907.12461.
Evan Sandhaus. 2008. The New York Times Annotated
Corpus. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia ,
6(12).
Natalie Schluter. 2017. The limits of automatic sum-
marisation according to rouge. In Proceedings of the
15th Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics , pages 41–
45, Valencia, Spain.
Abigail See, Peter J. Liu, and Christopher D. Manning.
2017. Get to the point: Summarization with pointer-
generator networks. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 1073–1083, Vancouver, Canada.
Abigail See, Aneesh Pappu, Rohun Saxena, Akhila
Yerukola, and Christopher D. Manning. 2019. Do
massively pretrained language models make better
storytellers? In Proceedings of the 23rd Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning ,
pages 843–861, Hong Kong, China.
Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Jianfeng Lu, and Tie-
Yan Liu. 2019. MASS: Masked sequence to se-
quence pre-training for language generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Machine Learning , Long Beach, California.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 27 , pages 3104–3112. Curran Associates, Inc.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 30 , pages 5998–6008. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.
Alex Wang, Kyunghyun Cho, and Michael Lewis.
2020. Asking and answering questions to evaluate
the factual consistency of summaries. In Proceed-
ings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , Virtual Conference,
Formerly Seattle, USA.
Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily Di-
nan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston. 2020. Neu-
ral text generation with unlikelihood training. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Learning Representations , Virtual Conference, For-
merly Addis Ababa Ethiopia.Sean Welleck, Jason Weston, Arthur Szlam, and
Kyunghyun Cho. 2019. Dialogue natural language
inference. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 3731–3741, Florence, Italy.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages
1112–1122, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Sam Wiseman, Stuart Shieber, and Alexander Rush.
2017. Challenges in data-to-document generation.
InProceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
2253–2263, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V .
Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus
Macherey, Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin John-
son, Xiaobing Liu, Lukasz Kaiser, Stephan Gouws,
Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto Kazawa, Keith
Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant Patil, Wei Wang,
Cliff Young, Jason Smith, Jason Riesa, Alex Rud-
nick, Oriol Vinyals, Greg Corrado, Macduff Hughes,
and Jeffrey Dean. 2016. Google’s neural machine
translation system: Bridging the gap between human
and machine translation. CoRR , abs/1609.08144.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime G. Car-
bonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V . Le. 2019.
XLNet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for
language understanding. CoRR , abs/1906.08237.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q.
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. BERTScore:
Evaluating text generation with BERT. In Proceed-
ings of the 8th International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations , Virtual Conference, Formerly
Addis Ababa Ethiopia.

=== Page 13 ===
A Model Hyperparameters and
Predictions
PTGENandTCONVS2S model predictions are pro-
vided by Narayan et al. (2018a) and Transformer
model predictions from GPT-T UNED ,TRANS2S
andBERTS2S, by Rothe et al. (2020). Both PT-
GENandTCONV S2S use a Stanford tokenized
vocabulary size of 50k. TRANS2S andBERTS2S
use a vocabulary size of around 30k WordPieces
(Wu et al., 2016) to match BERT pretrained vo-
cabulary and, GPT-T UNED , a vocabulary size of
around50k SentencePieces (Kudo and Richard-
son, 2018) to match the GPT-2 pretrained vocab-
ulary. All models use the same uncased vocabu-
lary on both source and target sides. Both PTGEN
andTCONV S2S summaries were generated using
beam search with beam size 10, the Transformer
models use beam size of 4. See Narayan et al.
(2018a) and Rothe et al. (2020) for more details on
these models.
ModelsFleiss’ Kappa
Hall. Fact. Rept. Inco.
PTGEN 0.70 0.91 0.89 0.84
TCONV S2S 0.73 0.91 0.93 0.90
TRANS2S 0.67 0.91 0.92 0.90
BERTS2S 0.67 0.88 0.94 0.93
GOLD 0.71 — 1.00 0.98
Table 6: Fleiss’s Kappa scores measuring word-level
agreements among annotators for different annotation
tasks: hallucination (Hall.), factuality (Fact.), repeti-
tion (Rept.) and incoherence (Inco.) assessments.
B Inter annotator agreement
We estimated Fleiss’s Kappa ( k) to assess the agree-
ment among our raters when categorizing a word in
the summary as one of faithful, intrinsically hallu-
cinated and extrinsically hallucinated. The results
are shown in Table 6. All models showed substan-
tial agreement (0.61 k0.80; Landis and Koch,
1977) among their annotations.
Table 6 also shows Fleiss’s Kappa ( k) to as-
sess the agreement among our raters for factuality.
All models showed almost perfect agreement (0.81
k1.0; Landis and Koch, 1977) among their
annotations.
C Highlighted Span Characteristics
Results in Table 7 shed some light on the charac-
teristics of hallucinated spans observed in different
abstracts. GOLD abstracts showed the least num-
ber of intrinsically hallucinated spans (0.55 per
document), whereas, PTGENabstracts showed theModelsIntrinsic Extrinsic avg.
length total (avg.) total (avg.)
PTGEN 625 (1.35) 1424 (2.85) 8.48
TCONV S2S 518 (1.04) 1556 (3.11) 8.44
TRANS2S 589 (1.18) 1556 (3.11) 7.39
BERTS2S 530 (1.06) 1520 (3.04) 6.12
GOLD 276 (0.55) 1807 (3.61) 7.11
Table 7: Total number of spans and the average number
of spans per document, annotated as intrinsic or extrin-
sic hallucinations for all 500 document-summary pairs
by three annotators. We also show the average span
length for each system.
Models Repetition Incoherence
PTGEN 17.5 20.3
TCONV S2S 16.7 17.7
TRANS2S 8.9 11.5
BERTS2S 8.7 9.5
GOLD 0.0 0.8
Table 8: Repetition and Incoherence Evaluation. The
numbers show the the percentage of 500 summaries
where at least one word in a summary was annotated by
all three annotators with the “Repetition” or “Incoher-
ence” related issue. The lowest numbers are boldfaced.
Metric Faithful Factual
ROUGE -1 0.197 0.125
ROUGE -2 0.162 0.095
ROUGE -L 0.162 0.113
BERTScore 0.190 0.116
Repetition 0.064 0.075
Incoherence 0.067 0.082
QA 0.044 0.027
Entailment 0.431 0.264
Table 9: Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcient ( jrsj) of dif-
ferent metrics with faithful and factual annotations.
least number of extrinsically hallucinated spans
(2.85 per document). Interestingly, the average
span length for PTGENsummaries was 8.48 words,
much higher than 6.12 words for BERTS2S sum-
maries. Our result demonstrates that (i) the effect
of hallucination in BERTS2S is more local than
what we observe in PTGENand (ii) despite a lower
number of extrinsically hallucinated spans or doc-
uments in PTGENcompared to that in BERTS2S
(2.85 vs 3.04 spans per document, 63.3% vs 64.1%
documents), the total number of words that were an-
notated as extrinsic hallucination is much higher in
PTGENthan in B ERTS2S (12075 vs 9302 words).
D Assessment of Linguistic
Irregularities.
Following standard practice in summarization, all
2500 document-summary pairs were annotated for
repetition and incoherence related linguistic irregu-
larities. Annotators were presented only a single-
sentence summary and were asked to identify all

=== Page 14 ===
Models FaithfulHallucinated
Factual I E I[E
total factual total factual total factual
PTGEN 24.7 19.9 0.4 63.3 2.2 75.3 2.6 27.3
TCONV S2S 21.5 17.7 0.8 71.5 5.0 78.5 5.4 26.9
TRANS2S 20.7 19.1 1.4 68.1 3.4 79.3 4.6 25.3
BERTS2S 26.9 16.9 1.8 64.1 6.6 73.1 7.8 34.7
GOLD 23.1 7.4 — 73.1 — 76.9 — —
Table 10: Intrinsic vs Extrinsic Hallucinations and their factuality. The numbers in “Hallucinated” columns show
the percentage of summaries out of 500 where at least one word was annotated by all three annotators as an intrinsic
(I) or extrinsic (E) hallucination. When a summary is not marked with any hallucination, it is “faithful” (1- I [E).
The “factual” columns within the “Hallucinated” column show for each type (I, E and I [E), the percentage of
summaries out of 500 annotated by all three annotators as factual. The ﬁnal “Factual” column shows the total
percentage of factual summaries (Faithful + I [Efactual). The highest numbers for faithful and factual, and the
lowest numbers for hallucinations are boldfaced.
spans of text in the summary that were either re-
peated or made the summary incoherent. We again
elicited judgments from three different annotators
for each document-summary pair. Results are
shown in Table 8.
Overall, all neural text generation systems are
getting better in generating repetition-free and co-
herent single-sentence summaries of news arti-
cles. Transformer-based models, TRANS2S and
BERTS2S in particular, perform superior to RNN-
based PTGENand CNN-based TCONV S2S mod-
els. Nonetheless, Table 9 shows that these metrics
fail to correlate with faithful, hallucinated and fac-
tual assessments of summaries. Fleiss’s Kappa ( k)
values for repetition and incoherence assessments
showed almost a perfect agreement (0.81 k
1.0; Landis and Koch, 1977) among our raters (see
Table 6).
E Full Hallucination Results
Table 10 has the full results from our human study
of hallucinations.
