=== Page 1 ===
Research & Policy Briefs
From the W orld Bank Chile Center and Malaysia Hub
Robo-Advisors: Investing through MachinesNo. 21, February 2019
Investing through online automated platforms, known as robo-advisors, is increasingly popular. Robo-advisors expand access to wealth 
management services by making it easier and less costly to open investments accounts and receive ﬁnancial advice, as well as plan and automate investment decisions. However, the rise of robo-advisors requires consumers to understand the limitations of these services and to get proper ﬁnancial education. Policy makers need to grapple with the impact of robo-advisors on the overall ﬁnancial system, as well as reassess their regulatory and supervisory practices.
 Robo-advisors are starting to grow in other parts of the 
world, too. In Europe, there are currently over 70 
robo-advisors, with 5 of them managing more than €100 
million (Burnmark 2017). Emerging economies have also witnessed the emergence of their own robo-advisors. For 
example, the number of robo-advisors is growing fast in 
Asia, driven by an emerging middle class and high 
technological connectivity (Forbes 2017). Robo-advisors are 
already present in China (mainland); Hong Kong SAR, China; India; Japan; Singapore; Thailand; and Vietnam, among 
other economies. Other emerging regions also have 
robo-advisors, but their presence is limited so far. For 
instance, there are only 6 robo-advisors in Africa and Latin 
America altogether (Burnmark 2017). Robo-advisors are expected to continue expanding around the world in years 
to come. Some projections even forecast that robo-advisors 
will manage around 10 percent of global investment assets 
by 2020 (Business Insider 2017). 
 Even though they are labelled “advisors,” robo-advisors 
typically provide services that go beyond simple advisory 
services to encompass comprehensive portfolio management services that allow individuals to plan and 
delegate their investment decisions. For example, in 12 out 
of 15 surveyed economies, robo-advisors oﬀered both 
advisory and management services (IOSCO 2016). In 
addition to portfolio allocations, the services provided can 
include portfolio rebalancing and tax management.
How Do Robo-Advisors Work? 
To help with investment decisions, robo-advisors start by 
deﬁning the investment strategy of each individual based on 
his/her investment goals and risk proﬁle. Robo-advisors ask 
potential clients about the purpose of the investment and 
the time horizon. Robo-advisors oﬀer investment strategies for a variety of goals, including retirement, saving for large 
expenditures, establishing a rainy day fund, or generating a 
stream of income to cover expenses. These questions are complemented with objective and subjective questions that 
evaluate a client’s willingness and capacity to tolerate risk. 
Objective risk metrics can include a client’s income and years to retirement. Subjective questions ask, for example, 
how the client would react to a market decline and how 
comfortable he/she is with ﬂuctuations in the market (Lam 
2016). To keep costs low and the process simple, clients’ The Rise of Robo-Advisors 
The ﬁnancial industry is continuously adopting new 
technologies to deliver ﬁnancial services in cheaper and 
more eﬃcient ways. The adoption of these technologies 
particularly deepened after the 2007−08 global ﬁnancial crisis, when tighter regulations on traditional banks and 
developments in computer science increased incentives to 
develop non-bank, technology-based ﬁnancial companies 
(IFC 2017). Some examples of technological innovations in 
ﬁnance include ATMs (automated teller machines), mobile payments, and trade ﬁnance using blockchain. Now, 
technological disruption has reached the realm of wealth 
management services, where automated ﬁnancial advisors, 
known as robo-advisors, are starting to compete with 
human advisors.  
 Conceived as a low-cost alternative to traditional human 
advisors, robo-advisors are online platforms that use 
algorithms to automatically build and manage clients’ 
portfolios. Though robo-advisors started as ﬁntech start-ups 
in the aftermath of the global ﬁnancial crisis, they have 
grown in popularity in recent years, particularly as more 
traditional ﬁnancial institutions have started to oﬀer their 
own robo-advisory services. For example, Charles Schwab, 
one of the largest brokerage ﬁrms in the United States, 
launched a robo-advisory service, Intelligent Portfolios, in 2015. Also in 2015, BlackRock, the world’s largest asset 
manager, acquired the robo-advisory company Future 
Advisor. Robo-advisory has also caught the attention of bank 
giants, such as Bank of America and Wells Fargo, which have 
recently started to oﬀer their own automated advisory 
services. 
 The United States is, by far, the leading market for 
robo-advisors. As of 2017, it had more robo-advisors than any other economy in the world (about 200) and captured 
57 percent of all investments in robo-advisors (Burnmark 
2017; CBInsights 2017). The estimated value of assets 
managed by robo-advisors in the United States exceeded 
US$400 billion in 2018 and is anticipated to grow at an average annual rate of 31 percent, reaching almost US$1.5 
trillion by 2023 (Figure 1). Currently, the largest 
robo-advisors in terms of assets under management are 
Vanguard (US$112 billion), followed by Intelligent Portfolios 
(US$33 billion) and Betterment (US$14 billion) (Figure 2).
Aﬃliation: Abraham and Schmukler: Development Research Group, the World Bank. Tessada: Pontiﬁcia Universidad Catolica de Chile (PUC & FinanceUC). E-mail 
addresses: fabraham@worldbank.org, sschmukler@worldbank.org, jtessada@uc.clAcknowledgement: We received very useful comments from Ana Maria Aviles, Norman Loayza, and Luis Servén,  as well as helpful edits from Nancy Morrison. 
The World Bank Chile Research and Development Center, the FCI group at the Malaysia Global Knowledge and Research Hub, and the KCP and SRP programs 
provided ﬁnancial support for this brief.
Objective and disclaimer: Research & Policy Briefs synthesize existing research and data to shed light on a useful and interesting question for policy debate.Research & Policy Briefs carry the names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The ﬁndings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank Group, its Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.-Facundo Abraham                                  Sergio L. Schmukler                                  José Tessada
Global Knowledge & Research Hub
in Malaysia
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized

=== Page 2 ===
2assessments are conducted using standard online short 
questionnaires.  
 Based on these two dimensions, robo-advisors use 
automated algorithms to make recommendations on how 
to allocate funds across diﬀerent types of assets. In most 
cases, these algorithms are based on modern portfolio 
theory (Bjernes and Vukovic 2017). This portfolio selection 
framework, introduced by Harry Markowitz (1952), is the 
most popular model of asset allocation and states that the 
optimal portfolio is one that maximizes the expected return 
given a level of risk tolerance or, alternatively, minimizes risk given a level of expected return. Robo-advisors construct 
portfolios with higher risk by increasing the ratio of equity to 
bonds and, within each type of instrument, investing in 
riskier assets (for example, moving away from government 
to municipal bonds or from U.S. to emerging market stocks). Portfolio optimization is adjusted by taking into account 
investment goals and the desired risk level. For example, for 
a given level of risk, asset allocation will be diﬀerent if the 
goal is to generate income for expenses or saving for the 
long term. 
 In addition to recommending an initial allocation of 
funds, algorithms can be designed to continuously monitor 
portfolios and detect deviations from the targeted risk. 
Whenever deviations are identiﬁed, the portfolio is 
automatically rebalanced. For example, the value of equity might increase faster than the value of bonds over time, 
increasing the share of the portfolio invested in equity. 
Because a higher share of equity increases risks, the portfolio might be rebalanced by selling equity. Moreover, 
the portfolio can be automatically rebalanced to reduce 
risks as time goes by and as the time when the funds are needed approaches. Rebalancing can also occur when the 
investor changes his/her risk tolerance or investment goals. 
 A corollary of modern portfolio theory is that by 
diversifying assets, investors can reduce risk without 
sacriﬁcing expected returns. To achieve diversiﬁcation at a low cost, robo-advisors mainly oﬀer to invest in exchange traded funds (ETFs) and index funds. These investment instruments tend to follow a basket of securities or an index 
(investing in all the securities included in the index and in 
the same proportion as the index). As a result, by acquiring only a few funds, investors can achieve a “market portfolio” 
while minimizing trading costs. Moreover, by passively 
holding funds, investors do not need to engage in active 
monitoring and trading, reducing trading costs even further. 
In practice, robo-advisors seem to follow a conservative approach, oﬀering funds that have wide coverage, long 
operating history, market liquidity, and good performance 
over time (Deutsche Bank 2017; Phoon and Koh 2018). 
 The entire process of using a robo-advisor (from opening 
an account to monitoring and readjusting the portfolio) can 
be performed online with no human interaction. Several 
robo-advisors are fully automated. These types of robo-advisors are usually less costly, and thus are oriented 
toward the mass market. Nevertheless, other robo-advisors 
oﬀer a hybrid system where clients have human interaction, 
albeit limited. For example, only a certain number of 
contacts are allowed or they can occur only via the Internet, not in person. These robo-advisors charge higher fees, but 
are still cheaper than traditional human advisors. 
Beneﬁts and Limitations of Robo-Advisors 
The use of robo-advisors for management wealth services can provide several advantages over traditional services 
that rely on human advisors. One appeal of using 
robo-advisors is that they are easily accessible. Instead of having to set an appointment with an advisor and attend a 
meeting at a physical location, robo-advisors oﬀer clients 
the possibility of obtaining ﬁnancial advice and managing investments at any time, from anywhere with an Internet 
connection. 
 Robo-advisors can also reduce the costs of ﬁnancial 
advice. In contrast to human advisory ﬁrms, robo-advisors 
can save on ﬁxed costs, such as the salaries of expensive ﬁnancial advisors or the maintenance of physical oﬃces. As Robo-Advisors:
Investing through Machines
Figure 1. Projected Assets Managed by Robo-Advisors in the United States, 2018−23
Source:  Statista 2019.The value of assets under management by robo-advisors is expected to more than triple between 2018 and 2023.US$billion
0 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600 
 426   750   1,049   1,266   1,405   1,486  
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

=== Page 3 ===
Research & Policy Brief No.21
3a result, they can reduce minimum investment 
requirements. For instance, Bank of America requires 
US$25,000 to open an account with a private ﬁnancial 
advisor, but only US$5,000 to open an account with their 
robo-advisor. Some robo-advisors, such as Betterment, do 
not require a minimum investment at all. In addition, robo-advisors can charge lower fees than human advisors. 
For example, a fully automated robo-advisor can charge a 
fee as low as 0.25 percent of assets managed, whereas the 
fees for traditional human advisors are no less than 0.75 
percent and can even reach 1.5 percent (EY 2015). On top of 
administrative fees, ﬁnancial advisors usually charge fees for 
trades performed, which robo-advisors typically minimize by following passive investing. 
 Using robo-advisors can yield additional savings in the form of “tax harvesting.” This is the practice of selling assets 
that experience a loss and using the proceeds to buy an 
asset with similar risk (keeping the same risk proﬁle of the 
portfolio). Recording a loss decreases capital gains, reducing 
taxable income. Performing tax harvesting can be complex: 
it involves identifying harvesting opportunities in a portfolio 
with several assets, ﬁnding suitable substitutes, and 
performing multiple trading, among other tasks. 
Robo-advisors can perform tax harvesting more eﬃciently 
and frequently than human advisors. 
 Robo-advisors can also help reduce some of the 
behavioral biases that are common in ﬁnancial advisory. 
Human advisors can be subjective, favor products for which 
they receive commission, have a limited capacity to monitor 
several assets simultaneously, and focus on domestic 
securities, among other biases. Thus, by transferring the 
decision-making process from humans to automated 
algorithms, robo-advisors can mitigate some of these biases. Nevertheless, even when robo-advisors are used, 
some biases might still be present. For example, similar to 
human advisors, robo-advisors might use certain brokers and other ﬁnancial ﬁrms not because they are the cheapest 
but because they receive higher commissions from them 
(Fein 2015). Moreover, algorithms are inevitably 
programmed by humans, so biases could be introduced during their design, consciously or unconsciously. For 
example, robo-advisors could recommend that clients hold 
a relatively large share of their investment in cash to then 
re-invest for proﬁt (Vox 2016). 
 Whereas robo-advisors can increase accessibility and aﬀordability of wealth management services, they can also 
entail costs. Although straightforward and time-saving, 
robo-advisors might not be able to know clients as well as 
human advisors do through multiple interactions, tailored 
questions, and closer relationships. “One-size-ﬁt-all” 
questionnaires might be too simple and narrow to provide a 
complete overview of a client’s ﬁnancial situation and 
his/her needs. Furthermore, these questionnaires assume 
that individuals with a similar risk proﬁle would provide the 
same answers to the same subjective questions, which 
might not necessarily be true (Deutsche Bank 2017). 
Robo-advisors also lack other important aspects of a client-advisor relation, such as helping clients deﬁne their 
ﬁnancial goals, counseling during market downturns, or 
dealing with possible changes in their lives (Accenture 
2015). 
 Furthermore, limited risk-assessment might not provide 
a complete overview of a client’s overall ﬁnancial condition. 
Robo-advisors might not ask about a client’s other 
investments (such as pension funds and real estate), future expenses, potential liabilities, spouse’s ﬁnancial condition, 
or insurances purchased, among other information (FINRA 
2016). If robo-advisors act on partial information, they 
might not provide optimal recommendations. 
 Robo-advisors can also lead to consumer disengagement. In other words, because the entire process 
is automatic, consumers might not make eﬀorts to Figure 2. Largest Robo-Advisors in the United States, 2018
Source:  Ortner 2018.Vanguard dominates the robo-advisor industry in the United States.US$billion112 
33 
14 10 8 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 
Vanguard Intellig ent P ortfolios
(Charles Sc hwab) Better ment Wealthfront Personal Capital Assets under Manag ement 

=== Page 4 ===
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/795161508437504068/Corporate-debt-maturity-in-developing-countries-sources-of-long-and-short-termismRobo-Advisors:
Investing through Machines
(Baker and Dellaert 2018). Regulatory agencies around the 
world have already started to think about how to 
adequately adopt robo-advisors and have issued guidelines, 
reports, and opinions on this issue. Regulators have stated that they would have to develop new skills to supervise 
robo-advisors eﬀectively. For example, they would need to 
have the technical capacity to assess robo-advisors’ 
algorithms. Similarly, regulators would need to understand 
how automated proﬁling of clients works. Regulators have also emphasized the importance of consumer education. 
Prospective clients need to have enough information to 
understand how robo-advisors operate and whether or not 
they are suitable to their needs. Regulatory organizations 
have also raised concerns related to cybersecurity and data 
privacy, among other issues (ESAs 2015; FINRA 2016; IOSCO 
2016).
 
 The robo-advisory industry is still at an early stage and, 
as such, few studies have analyzed its diﬀerent impacts on 
the ﬁnancial system, including on asset markets. As 
robo-advisors expand and more information on them 
becomes available, more analyses could try to shed light on these issues. For example, future work could analyze who 
uses robo-advisors, and thus to what extent they are 
contributing to better ﬁnancial decisions by a wider array of 
investors. Further analyses could also focus on whether 
human and robo-advisors are substitutes or complements (either catering to diﬀerent population segments or 
individuals using both at the same time), as well as on how 
the proﬁt margins and cost structures compare between 
the two. To the extent that robo-advisors can be accessed 
by any individual from any location, it would also be 
interesting to study whether robo-advising activity tends to 
be concentrated in a few economies and accessed by 
investors from all over the world, or economies have their 
own robo-advisors catered to their own domestic investors. 
It would be useful to analyze if the same robo-advisor gives 
consumers in diﬀerent economies tailored recommendations based on local products and 
environments (such as tax codes), or instead provides 
standard international products. Further insights on these 
topics would help to better understand the true potential 
and pitfalls of robo-advisors.understand how the service works, or even continuously 
monitor their investments. This issue is particularly relevant when robo-advisors are oﬀered to individuals with relatively lower wealth who might have no experience with investment products (OECD 2017). 
 Because robo-advisors are relatively new, their business 
models have not been tested in the long term and under ﬁnancial stress. Thus, it remains unclear to what extent consumers will be protected in case a robo-advisor company fails. Some jurisdictions have taken steps to protect consumers. For example, robo-advisors in the United States are required to be members of the Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC), which provides insurance for up to US$ 500,000 per customer in case of bankruptcy of a member ﬁrm.
 
The Future of Robo-Advisors  Because of their low cost and easy accessibility, robo-advisors have the potential to promote more sophisticated investment practices within a population not used to having access to ﬁnancial advisors. Robo-advisors could be particularly attractive to certain groups such as 
households with relatively lower income or younger 
individuals, who might not invest because their investable funds are too small, are located far from urban centers, or simply feel intimidated by human advisors. Increased participation in capital markets, would oﬀer these individuals new ways to save for retirement, rainy days, or any other purpose. At the same time, robo-advisors might beneﬁt individuals that already have investments. Not only can their costs be reduced, but thanks to the enhanced computational power and (at least in theory) objectivity, robo-advisors can design more eﬃcient portfolios compared to humans. In fact, there is empirical evidence 
that the use of robo-advisors can be associated with higher 
diversiﬁcation and less behavioral biases (D’ Acunto, Prabhala, and Rossi 2018).  
 Proper regulation and supervision will be a key determinant of the success of robo-advisors. Policy makers would beneﬁt from establishing good practices that guarantee that robo-advisors are objective and transparent, and provide advice appropriate to each client’s needs 
References
FINRA. 2016. Report on Digital Investment Advice. 
Forbes. 2017. “Why Are Robo-Advisors on the Rise in Asia?” November 15. 
IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2017. “Digital Financial Services: Challenges  
 and Opportunities for Emerging Market Banks.” EMCompass, Note 42. 
IOSCO (International Organization of Securities Commissions). 2016. Update to 
 the Report on the IOSCO Automated Advice Tools Survey. 
Lam, J. 2016. “Robo-Advisors: A Portfolio Management Perspective.” Paper 
 presented to the Distinction in the Major thesis, Yale College. 
Markowitz, H. 1952. “Portfolio Selection.” The Journal of Finance 7 (1): 77−91. 
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2017. 
 Robo-Advice for Pensions. 
Ortner, J. 2018. “Questions Still Remain if Robo Advising Is Right for You.” Seeking 
 Alpha, Nov 12. 
Phoon, K., and F. Koh. 2018. “Robo-Advisors and Wealth Management.” The 
 Journal of Alternative Investments 20 (3): 79−94. 
Statista. 2019. “Robo-Advisors.” https://www.statista.com/outlook/337/109/robo-
 advisors/united-states. 
Vox. 2016. “Charles Schwab Oﬀers Free Investment Advice − But There's a Big Catch.”  
 May 24.Accenture. 2015. The Rise of Robo-Advice: Changing the Concept of Wealth 
 Management . Baker, T., and B. Dellaert. 2018. “Regulating Robo Advice Across the Financial 
 Services Industry.” Faculty Scholarship, University of Pennsylvania Law School. 
Bjernes, L., and A. Vukovic. 2017. “Automated Advice: A Portfolio Management 
 Perspective on Robo-Advisors.” Master’s thesis, Norwegian University of 
 Science and Technology. 
Burnmark, 2017. Digital Wealth. 
Business Insider. 2017. “Robo Advisors: Online Financial Advisors that Fit in Your 
 Pocket.” January 4. 
CBInsights. 2017 “A Wealth Tech World: Mapping Robo-Advisors Around the 
 Globe.” April 21. 
D’ Acunto, F., N. Prabhala, and A. Rossi. 2018. “The Promises and Pitfalls of  Robo-Advising.” CESifo Working Paper 6907, CESifo Group Munich. 
Deutsche Bank. 2017. “Robo-Advice − A True Innovation in Asset Management.” 
 EU Monitor Global Financial Markets. 
ESAs (European Supervisory Authorities). 2015. Joint Committee Discussion 
 Paper: On Automation in Financial Advice. 
EY . 2015. Advice Goes Virtual: How New Digital Investment Services Are Changing 
 the Wealth Management Landscape. 
Fein, M. 2015 “Robo-Advisors: A Closer Look.” Banking & Insurance Journal 7 (174).
Global Knowledge & Research Hub
in Malaysia
