=== Page 1 ===
Artificial Intelligence in FinTech:
understanding robo-advisors
adoption among customers
Daniel Belanche, Luis V. Casaló and Carlos Flavián
Department of Marketing Management and Marketing Research,
University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain
Abstract
Purpose –Considering the increasing impact of Artificial Intelligence (AI) on financial technology (FinTech),
the purpose of this paper is to propose a research framework to better understand robo-advisor adoption by a
wide range of potential customers. It also predicts that personal and sociodemographic variables ( familiaritywith robots, age, gender and country) moderate the main relationships.
Design/methodology/approach –Data from a web survey of 765 North American, British and Portuguese
potential users of robo-advisor services confirm the validity of the measurement scales and provide the input
for structural equation modeling and multisample analyses of the hypotheses.
Findings –Consumers ’attitudes toward robo-advisors, together with mass media and interpersonal subjective
norms, are found to be the key determinants of adoption. The influences of perceived usefulness and attitude are
slightly higher for users with a higher level of familiarity with robots; in turn, subjective norms are significantly
more relevant for users with a lower familiarity and for customers from Anglo-Saxon countries.Practical implications –Banks and other firms in the finance industry should design robo-advisors to be
used by a wide spectrum of consumers. Marketing tactics applied should consider the customer ’s level of
familiarity with robots.
Originality/value –This research identifies the key drivers of robo-advisor adoption and the moderating
effect of personal and sociodemographic variables. It contributes to understanding consumers ’perceptions
regarding the introduction of AI in FinTech.
Keywords Robo-advisors, Artificial Intelligence, Robots, Finance, Technology adoption
Paper type Research paper
1. Introduction
Robots and Artificial Intelligence (AI) are already transforming all kinds of industries,
from manufacturing, to retail and service provision. This technological revolution is
threatening established principles in econ omy and labor, since automated technology
penetration has been growing at a rate of 20 pe rcent per year (International Federation of
Robotics, 2017) and may replace almost half of current jobs in the ne xt 20 years (Acemoglu
and Restrepo, 2017).
This is also the case in the finance industry, where financial technology (FinTech) is
being revealed as a key element in the strategy of banks and financial start-up companies
( Jung, Dorner, Weinhardt and Pusmaz, 2018). The concept of FinTech goes beyond
e-banking and consumer digitalization and focuses on the development and successful
introduction of innovative technology instruments to meet users ’financial needs and
demands. In this line, AI represents a clear opportunity to advance the transformation of the
finance industry by providing users with greater value and increasing firms ’revenues
(Park et al. , 2016). For instance, more than a million customers of Bank of America use a
chatbot named Erica to answer basic banking questions (Rosman, 2018). Another amazing
example is the case of Nao, a small bank teller humanoid that attends customers side by
side with employees in some branches of the Bank of Tokyo (Marinova et al. , 2017).
However, despite these thought-provoking innovations, the most disruptive phenomenon
within FinTech has been the automated or assisted management of investments by means
of AI, popularly called robo-advisors.Industrial Management & Data
Systems
Vol. 119 No. 7, 2019
pp. 1411-1430
© Emerald Publishing Limited
0263-5577
DOI 10.1108/IMDS-08-2018-0368Received 29 August 2018
Revised 6 March 2019
Accepted 28 March 2019The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com /0263-5577.htm
1411Artificial
Intelligence in
FinTech

=== Page 2 ===
In contrast to traditional human advisory services, robo-advisors reduce fees and
provide 24/7 access to finances (Faubion, 2016; Park et al., 2016). Thus, these autonomous
systems are expected to democratize the use of financial advisor services to a wider range of
customers (Sironi, 2016). As a consequence, banks and other finance companies are
launching robo-advisor services as a source of competitive advantage. Indeed, robo-advisors
are currently managing more than $880,000m in assets, and are growing at an annual rate
over 30 percent (Statista, 2019).
Nonetheless, consumer adoption of robo-advisor services “has been slow so far ”
( Jung, Dorner, Weinhardt and Pusmaz, 2018, p. 367). As is typical of disruptive innovations in
initial stages, only a small group of early adopters have been willing to rely on this new system
that is replacing traditional practices in finance management services (Laukkanen and
Pasanen, 2008). That is, after attracting early adopters, in order to achieve greater effectiveness
and value companies have been aiming to introduce the service to a greater public that may be
initially hesitant about the worth of such an innovation (Ryu, 2018). Thus, managers need some
guidance on how to successfully implement robo-advisors in order to help retain existing, and
attract potential, customers.
However, despite the opportunities derived from the launching of FinTech AI applications,
research on robo-advisor introduction is very limited. Most studies in the area have focused on
technical or legal issues (Glaser et al., 2019; Ji, 2017), ignoring the customer perspective, though
this would help to extend these services to a greater number of customers. The scant research
on robo-advisory designs ( Jung, Dorner, Weinhardt and Pusmaz, 2018) has highlighted a need
to increase the usability of these systems to facilitate users ’interaction with them.
Nevertheless, given the potential broad expansion of robo-advisors in the finance industry,
there is a need to develop a comprehensive model that better explains the key perceptions and
motivations driving robo-advisor adoption by a wide range of customers.
To do so, and based on well-established technology adoption theories, the authors
propose a framework wherein perceptions about a robo-advisor ’s usefulness and ease of use,
together with consumer attitudes, impa ct the intention to adopt this service.
Complementarily, acknowledging the disruptive change that robo-advisors entail, the
study ’s research model also predicts that subjective norms (i.e. social influence) motivate
customers to start using robo-advisors.
As an additional contribution of this work, s ome moderating variables are considered
that would be particularl y relevant in the adoption of these kinds of AI-driven
innovations. Considering that customers va ry in their level of familiarity with AI and
robot-based systems (e.g. some users already have experience with AI through services
such as Alexa and products such as Roomba), the study ’s framework proposes that users ’
familiarity with such technology may play a m oderating role. Specifically, it is suggested
that customers with higher familiarity wi ll tend to assign higher value to their own
attitudes and usefulness perceptions, wher eas customers with lower familiarity with
robots will base their decision on subjective no rms to a greater extent. Following previous
research on technology adoption (Sun and Zha ng, 2006), age and gender are also included
as control variables. Finally, to increase t he scope of the research to a broader range of
customers, a post hoc analysis deepens understandi ng of cultural differences by
contrasting the distinctions between the three countries considered in the empirical study:
Portugal, the UK and the USA.
In sum, in order to adapt to the transformation of the finance industry, firms should seek
to better understand customers ’needs and demands so as to succeed in the introduction of
robo-advisors. Given the lack of empirical work explaining robo-advisor adoption, the
research contributes to the literature by:
analyzing the relevance of key determinants (i.e. utilitarian and social motivations) of
customers ’decision to adopt robo-advisor systems;1412IMDS
119,7

=== Page 3 ===
evaluating possible differences in the adoption process depending on customers ’
characteristics (i.e. familiarity with robots, age, gender, culture), which may moderate
the relationships in the framework; and
improving understanding and discussing consumers ’perceptions about robo-advisor
services in order to guide successful infusion of AI-driven innovations, which will
benefit both companies and the general public.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next section presents the research
framework, which is followed by the hypotheses formulation. The international empirical
study, data collection process and methodology are then explained. Then results and main
findings are described, and finally, implications of the research for managers and customers,
together with its limitations, and lines for further research are discussed.
2. Literature review
2.1 The challenge of introducing AI in frontline services
The phenomenon of unprecedented growt h of AI and robot-based systems across
industries is having a critical impact o n the economic, social and labor domains
(Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017). From a theore tical perspective, Huang and Rust (2018)
described AI as a major source of innovati on that will gradua lly replace human
jobs in the future. More precisely, they predic ted that automated technology will develop
mechanical intelligence first, then analytic al capacity (e.g. robo-advisors) and, after
some time, intuitive and even empathetic intelligence; this will require workers to
become specialized in tasks that can be less easily accomplished via automation (Huang
and Rust, 2018).
In a similar vein, an emerging field of research is focusing on the challenge of introducing
service innovations involving robots, droids or AI (Singh et al., 2017; Han and Yang, 2018),
with particular attention to those technologies that directly interact with customers in
frontline operations (e.g. physically, online) (Van Doorn et al., 2017). For instance, Singh et al.
(2017) affirmed that customer interaction with organizations is being profoundly disrupted
by intelligent interfaces. Similarly, Grewal et al. (2017) predicted that AI systems (e.g. Alexa,
Cortana, Siri) would directly impact consumer shopping behaviors. Complementarily,
Van Doorn et al. (2017) indicated that technology infusion within service interactions would
depend on the level of human and automated social presence; that is, on the capacity of
frontline robots to engage customers at a social level.
All in all, there is an increasing awareness of the need for firms to introduce AI advances
to progress their management practices and product offerings (Han and Yang, 2018).
By doing so, companies can achieve competitive advantage to better adapt to a market
transformation taking place in the short and medium term. Nevertheless, these theoretical
insights require empirical evidence to guide both customers and managers in the successful
introduction of AI-related services.
2.2 Previous knowledge on robo-advisors and its adoption by customers
Robo-advisors have been defined as “digital platforms comprising interactive and intelligent
user assistance components that use information technology to guide customers through an
automated investment advisory process ”( Jung, Dorner, Glaser and Morana, 2018, p. 81).
The use of robo-advisors by regular customers is relatively simple. First, this technology-
based service assesses the profile of the customer via an initial questionnaire (i.e. goal, risk,
return expectations). It then starts to make specific recommendations or actions about
investment or portfolio rebalancing, as would a human financial advisor, but it does so
autonomously and based on AI.1413Artificial
Intelligence in
FinTech

=== Page 4 ===
Robo-advisors present numerous advantages compared to traditional human advisors,
such as improving the temporal and ubiquitous accessibility to financial services,
significantly reducing management fees and providing wider investment options based on
systematic and quantitative analyses without ulterior motivations (Faubion, 2016; Park
et al., 2016). As a result, the amount of assets under management by robo-advisors, which, as
noted above, has already surpassed $880,000m, is expected to obtain an annual growth of
31.45 percent in the period 2019 –2022 (Statista, 2019). In other words, banks and financial
firms are launching these services to gain competitive advantage and expand their business
to a wider public.
Despite the increasing interest on this ph enomenon, literatur e on robo-advisor
introduction is currently scarce and has f requently focused on the legal complexities
( Ji, 2017) and risk-management aspects (Glaser et al. , 2019). The few recent studies on
robo-advisors from a customer approach hav e described some of the problems related to
widespread adoption of this ser vice by customers. For instan ce, Jung, Dorner, Weinhardt
and Pusmaz (2018) pointed out that banks ar e more enthusiastic about FinTech and robo-
advisors than are customers, who often are reluctant to entrust their money to these
kinds of AI-driven platforms. The results of Jung, Dorner, Weinhardt and Pusmaz ’s
(2018), experiment which was conducted in a co ntrolled lab setting, suggest that greater
effort is needed to improve r obo-advisor design (especially in terms of layout and
usability) in order to boost adoption of this innovation by customers. From a more
technical perspective, Faloon and Scherer (2017) identified personalization as the
distinctive feature of robo-advisors comp ared to traditional human advisory services.
In turn, Heinrich and Schwabe (2018) concl uded that IT-supported advice-giving
processes increase customers ’learning, enabling them to make more informed decision
related to financial products.
Therefore, due to the novelty of robo-advisory services, there is currently a lack of
knowledge about the key determinants of their adoption by regular customers. As the
innovation attempts to democratize advisory services to a wider public (Sironi, 2016), the
current research seeks to close this gap by proposing a broad, comprehensive model that
includes the main global drivers of customer adoption of robo-advisors.
3. Hypothesis formulation
3.1 An extension of the technology acceptance model to understand robo-advisor adoption
Or proposed model is based on the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis, 1989; Davis
et al. , 1989). TAM is one of the best frameworks by which to understand users ’reactions
toward technological innovations because it is able to explain, to a great extent, consumer
adoption of many innovations. As a result, this model has been widely used in previous
literature in both finance and online settings (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000; Venkatesh et al.,
2003).
However, the simplicity of TAM has been frequently criticized (e.g. Bagozzi, 2007) for
failing to consider other relevant aspects, such as the influence of social processes, which
suggests that attitudes should be complemented with subjective norms, as proposed by the
theory of reasoned action (Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975). Therefore, and similar to the proposals
of Venkatesh and Davis (2000) regarding software introduction, this study broadens TAM
by integrating the influence of subjective norms (i.e. individuals ’perceptions about the
opinions of others) which could be crucial in the adoption of financial robo-advisors by
potential users.
In addition, to better understand this adoption process, the current study considers the
moderating role of individual characteristics. In particular, although robo-advisors represent a
new service linked to more familiar or experienced AI and robot technology (e.g. Alexa), the
level of familiarity may vary among customers (Young et al., 2009). Thus, it is proposed that1414IMDS
119,7

=== Page 5 ===
customers ’familiarity with robot technology may moderate the main effects of the study ’s
framework. According to previous literature (Sun and Zhang, 2006), the influence of the
antecedents of behavioral intentions may vary due to heterogeneity across users depending
on personal characteristics such as age or gender; thus, these two variables are also included
as control variables in the model.
The research model is summarized in Figure 1.
3.2 TAM-related hypotheses
Consistent with TAM formulations (Davis, 1989; Davis et al. , 1989), its proposed
relationships are first adapted to the context of adoption of financial robo-advisors in order
to explain customers ’behavioral intentions (i.e. “the strength of a person ’s willingness to
perform a certain behavior ”Belanche et al., 2012).
Specifically, this model proposes that behavioral intentions mainly depend on attitude
(i.e. “the degree to which a person has a favorable or unfavorable evaluation of the behavior
in question ”Ajzen, 1991, p. 188) and perceived usefulness (i.e. “the degree to which a person
believes that using a particular system would enhance his or her performance ”Davis, 1989,
p. 320). In turn, following a cost-benefit paradigm, attitude is affected by perceived
usefulness and perceived ease of use ( “the degree to which a person believes that using a
particular system would be free of effort ”Davis, 1989, p. 320). Finally, perceived ease of use
also plays an instrumental role, and positively influences perceived usefulness as
performance may be increased due to the effort saved (Davis et al., 1989). Adapting these
well-established TAM relationships to the present research context, the following
hypotheses are proposed:
H1a. Perceived ease of use of financial robo-advisors has a positive effect on their
perceived usefulness.
H1b. Perceived ease of use of financial robo-advisors has a positive effect on attitudes
toward them.
H1c. Perceived usefulness of financial robo-advisors has a positive effect on attitudes
toward them.
PERCEIVED
USEFULNESSH1d: +
H1c: +
H1a: +
H1b: +
H2: +H1e: +
PERCEIVED
EASE OF USEATTITUDEINTENTION
TO USE
MODERATING
VARIABLES
SUBJECTIVE
NORMS
EXTERNAL
INFLUENCEINTERPERSONAL
INFLUENCE
FAMILIARITY ( H3)
AGE (control)
SEX (control)Figure 1.
Research model1415Artificial
Intelligence in
FinTech

=== Page 6 ===
H1d. Perceived usefulness of financial robo-advisors has a positive effect on the
intention to use them.
H1e. Attitude toward financial robo-advisors has a positive effect on the intention to
use them.
3.3 The influence of subjective norms
Normative influences have been described in social psychology as “a person ’s perception
that most people who are important to her/him think she/he should or should not perform
the behavior in question ”(Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975, p. 302). Literature has clearly
established that these norms rely on social information as a kind of social pressure to
perform a particular behavior based on the personal perception of others ’opinions (Taylor
and Todd, 1995; Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975).
The influence of social norms could be of particular interest with reference to customers
facing a disruptive change with limited information (Taylor and Todd, 1995), an in the case
of robo-advisors. In the absence of their own experience or well-formed beliefs, individuals
are influenced by social norms by means of three psychological mechanisms (Belanche et al.,
2012): internalization of messages from expert sources, need to identify with relevant others
by accepting their opinions and compliance with others to achieve social rewards or avoid
social punishments.
In the specific domain of e-finance, Bhattacherjee (2000) proposed that subjective norms
are based on interpersonal sources (e.g. influence of peers and superiors) and external
sources of information (e.g. influence of mass media). This view agrees with previous
research on technology-based innovations, where the opinion of society affects individuals ’
behavior by means of comments and behaviors of people and mass media news and reports
related to the innovation (Belanche et al. , 2012). Thus, assuming that consumers need
some basic social confirmation and account for social incentives related to the use of
robo-advisors, the following hypothesis is proposed:
H2. Subjective norms about using financial robo-advisors have a positive effect on the
intention to use them.
3.4 Moderating effects
The use of AI in finance represents a disrupt ing innovation not only from the internal
firm perspective, but also in the eyes of consumers (Singh et al. , 2017). Specifically,
robo-advisors are autonomous intelligent systems that provide advice about finance
management –a task that is clearly replacing the job of human employees and
that could involve interacting with AI syst ems with pseudo social presence (Van Doorn
et al. , 2017). Thus, this transformation sugg ests that consumers need to adapt to the
innovation in order to be willing to engage with the interactions it entails
for the management of their finances. Ind eed, there has been increasing attention
toward robotic and AI systems that provide services (e.g. Roomba cleaner,
Alexa assistant), and there is also a growing number of formative courses and
materials dealing with the programming of robots and AI systems designed to directly
interact with humans. Nevertheless, not all individuals have this knowledge or
experience; thus, customers may differ in their level of familiarity with such innovations
(Young et al. , 2009). Consequently, this study suggests that individuals ’differences in
their level of familiarity with robotic syst ems may play a crucial role in the adoption
of robo-advisors.
In this line, previous research has found that customers with low levels of familiarity
with online banking require auxiliary features (e.g. information about investment topics)1416IMDS
119,7

=== Page 7 ===
compared to customers with higher familiarity, who tend to focus on utilitarian reasons
(Mäenpää, et al., 2008). Updating these findings to the current context, it is proposed that
familiarity with AI and robots acts as a moderating variable. Users with a higher level of
familiarity (i.e. previous interaction or training) with such innovations will have first-hand
knowledge, will value such technology in terms of their usefulness, and will have better
attitudes toward them because they have more knowledge about the practical value of
these systems and have a solid personal predisposition about the targeted behavior
(Castañeda et al., 2007). Conversely, consumers with lower familiarity will be more affected
by subjective norms (i.e. others ’opinions) because they have vaguer and indirect knowledge
about robo-advisors (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000). Consequently, the following moderating
effect of familiarity is proposed:
H3. The effects of perceived usefulness and attitude on intention to use robo-advisors are
strengthened for users with higher familiarity with robots, whereas the effect of
subjective norms on intention to use robo-advisors is strengthened for users with
lower familiarity with robots.
For the sake of completeness, this study also considers the moderating influence of two
sociodemographic characteristics, age and gender. Following Sun and Zhang (2006), these
individual characteristics may help better explain the dynamics of adoption processes.
In this respect, previous literature has suggested that older people have more stable beliefs
and are less susceptible to others ’messages compared to younger people (e.g. Hess, 1994).
Similarly, women are more willing than men to take others ’opinions into account when
deciding to use a new technology (e.g. Sun and Zhang, 2006; Venkatesh et al., 2003). As a
result, the influence of the antecedents of intention to use financial robo-advisors may vary
according to these variables.
4. Method
4.1 Data collection
A web survey was used to collect the data for this study; specifically, participants comprised
765 customers recruited via Prolific, a market research company, which enabled us to obtain
a diverse sample in terms of demographic characteristics such as gender (56.99 percent of
participants are female), age ( o25 years 17.39 percent, 25 –34 years 34.25 percent, 35 –44
years 26.41 percent, 45 –54 years 14.25 percent, 55 or more 7.71 percent), income ( o$5,000
5.89 percent, $5,000 –10,000 13.48 percent, $10,001 –25,000 32.98 percent, $25,001 –50,000
31,54 percent, W$50,000 16.10 percent), employment situation ( full-time job 57.89 percent,
part-time job 15.58 percent, student 10.73 percent, unemployed 4.58 percent, retired or other
11.78 percent) and country of origin (28.76 percent of participants come from Portugal, 36.34
percent from the UK and 33.20 percent from the USA). The study was targeted to potential
users of robo-advisors with at least some previous experience with online banking. To
develop the web survey and make the most of this method, the study followed
recommendations by Illum et al. (2010), such as keeping it short and guaranteeing the
anonymity of participants.
Specifically, all participa nts were invited to read a gen eral description regarding
financial robo-advisors. In order to avoi d bias due to brand reputation (MacKenzie et al. ,
1986), the robo-advisor was not linked to any specific firm, but the phrase “consider that
you have some money for investment and your bank gives you the possibility to use a
robo-advisor ”was added. Next, respondents answe red the questionnaire, including a
portion on their perceptions of robo-advisors (i.e. perceived usefulness, perceived ease of
use), subjective norms (i.e. social influence a nd external influence), attitude toward the
use of robo-advisors, their behavioral inte ntion to use them and previous familiarity
with the use of robots. All scales (see Table AI in the Appendix) were based on1417Artificial
Intelligence in
FinTech

=== Page 8 ===
self-reported measures and used seven-poi nt Likert-type response formats, from 1
(“completely disagree ”)t o7( “completely agree ”).
4.2 Measurement validation
The initial set of items proposed to measure the latent constructs came from an in-depth
review of relevant literature pertaining to online banking, e-commerce and the adoption of
new technologies. The measures were adapted from previous scales assessing perceived
usefulness and perceived ease of use (e.g. Davis et al. , 1989; Bhattacherjee, 2000),
interpersonal influence and external influence (e.g. Belanche et al. , 2012; Bhattacherjee,
2000), attitude (e.g. Taylor and Todd, 1995; Bhattacherjee, 2000), intention to use
(e.g. Mathieson, 1991; Bhattacherjee, 2000) and familiarity (e.g. Flavián et al. , 2006; Casaló
et al. , 2008). The extensive review helped to ensure the content validity of the scales.
Following Zaichkowsky (1985), the authors also asked a panel of experts about the degree to
which they judged that the items were clearly representative of the targeted construct, in
order to test for face validity. Items that prompted a high level of consensus among the
experts were retained (Lichtenstein et al., 1990).
To confirm the dimensional structure of the scales, this study used confirmatory
factor analysis and employed the statistical s oftware EQS 6.1. First, the factor loadings of
the confirmatory model were verified re garding whether they were statistically
significant (at 0.01) and higher than 0.5 (S teenkamp and Van Trijp, 1991; Jöreskog and
Sörbom, 1993). No item needed to be eliminat ed, and acceptable levels of convergence,
R2values, and model fit were obtained ( χ2¼404.864, 155 df, po0.000; Satorra-Bentler
scaled χ2¼263.251, 155 df, p¼0.05672; NFI ¼0.979; NNFI ¼0.989; CFI ¼0.991;
IFI¼0.991; RMSEA ¼0.030; 90% confidence inter val (0.024, 0.036)). To assess
construct reliability, this study also checked that values of the composite reliability
indicator ( Jöreskog, 1971) were above the suggested minimum of 0.65 (Steenkamp and
Geyskens, 2006), as can be seen in Table I. To f urther ensure conver gent validity, it was
verified that average variance extracted (A VE) values were greater than 0.5 (see Table I)
and converged on only one construct (Forne ll and Larcker, 1981). Finally, regarding
discriminant validity, Table I shows that eac h construct shared more variance with its
own measures than with the other constructs in the model (Fornell and Larcker, 1981);
that is, for each construct, the square root of the AVE is greater than correlations
among constructs.
4.3 Multidimensionality of subjective norms
Previous literature has suggested that subjective norms may be formed by different social
influences (e.g. Belanche et al., 2012), and has mainly differentiated between interpersonal
and external influences (e.g. Bhattacherjee, 2000). In order to understand whether these two
influences form a multidimensional structure, two alternative models were compared
Construct (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) CR AVE
Perceived ease of use (1) 0.901 0.945 0.812
Perceived usefulness (2) 0.590 0.906 0.948 0.821
Interpersonal influence (3) 0.410 0.538 0.866 0.900 0.750
External influence (4) 0.340 0.440 0.671 0.868 0.902 0.754
Attitude (5) 0.535 0.701 0.593 0.489 0.934 0.954 0.873
Intention to use (6) 0.600 0.826 0.548 0.456 0.834 0.924 0.946 0.854
Notes: Diagonal elements (italic) are the square root of the AVE (variance shared between the constructs and
their measures). Off-diagonal elements are the correlations among constructsTable I.
Construct reliability,
convergent
validity anddiscriminant validity1418IMDS
119,7

=== Page 9 ===
following a rival model strategy (Anderson and Gerbing, 1988). On the one hand, a first-
order model in which the dimensions were not differentiated was developed (all items
formed a first-order factor). On the other hand, a second-order model (Steenkamp and Van
Trijp, 1991) with two dimensions measuring subjective norms (i.e. interpersonal and
external influence) was evaluated. A χ2difference test with one degree of freedom was
performed to determine which model had a better fit (Bagozzi and Dholakia, 2006).
The result of this test confirmed the multidimensionality of subjective norms, since the
χ2difference was significant ( χ2
d(1)¼738.359; po0.01). In addition, the remaining fit
indicators were much higher in the second-order model (see Table II) than in the first-order
model, again suggesting the multidimensionality of the construct subjective norms.
5. Results
5.1 Hypotheses test
To test the TAM-related hypotheses ( H1a –H1e) and the influence of subjective norms on the
intention to use financial robo-advisors ( H2), a structural equation model was developed.
The model fit showed acceptable values ( χ2¼697.652, 163 df, po0.000; Satorra-Bentler
scaled χ2¼462.847, 163 df, po0.000; NFI ¼0.962; NNFI ¼0.971; CFI ¼0.975; IFI ¼0.975;
RMSEA ¼0.049; 90% confidence interval (0.044, 0.054)). First, regarding TAM-related
relationships, it was observed that perceived ease of use has a positive influence on both
perceived usefulness ( γ¼0.590, po0.01) and attitude ( γ¼0.177, po0.01), supporting H1a
andH1b, respectively. In turn, perceived usefulness positively affects attitude ( β¼0.721,
po0.01), which supports H1c, but its direct influence on intention to use is not significant
(β¼−0.006, pW0.1); therefore, H1d is not supported. Finally, intention to use is affected by
attitude ( β¼0.800, po0.01), supporting H1e. In sum, the results confirm all the proposed
TAM-related hypotheses at the 0.01 level, except for H1d (direct influence of usefulness on
intention), which is not supported. Similarly, intention to use is affected by subjective norms
(γ¼0.230, po0.01), supporting H2.
In addition, the proposed framework implies some indirect effects of perceived ease of
use and usefulness. On the one hand, perceived ease of use exerts significant indirect effects
on attitude (0.425, po0.01) via usefulness and intention to use (0.478, po0.01) via
usefulness and attitude. On the other hand, perceived usefulness exerts a significant indirecteffect on intention to use (0.577, po0.01) via attitude. These relationships can largely
explain the dependent variables, perceived usefulness ( R2¼0.348), attitude ( R2¼0.702) and
intention to use ( R2¼0.684). The values found are considerably high, as TAM models
usually predict between 0.44 and 0.57 of the variance in usage intentions (Venkatesh and
Davis, 2000).
H3proposes a moderating role of familiarity, such that the effects of perceived
usefulness and attitude on intention to use robo-advisors are strengthened for users with
higher familiarity with robots, whereas the effect of subjective norms on intention to use
robo-advisors is strengthened for users with lower familiarity with robots. In addition,
possible moderating effects of age and gender were checked as the influence of the
antecedents of behavioral intentions may vary due to heterogeneity across users depending
on personal characteristics (Sun and Zhang, 2006). To assess these moderating effects,
Modelχ2
(pW0.05)NNFI
(W0.95)CFI
(W0.95)IFI
(W0.95)RMSEA
(o0.08)90% interval
RMSEA
First order 755.444 (9 df), po0.01 0.777 0.866 0.867 0.231 (0.211; 0.251)
Second order 17.085 (8 df), p¼0.029 0.999 0.999 0.999 0.018 (0.000; 0.048)
Note: Recommended values for the fit indices are in brackets (see Hooper et al., 2008 for a review)Table II.
Fit indices for the
multidimensionality
analysis1419Artificial
Intelligence in
FinTech

=== Page 10 ===
a series of multisample analyses were performed. This method is widely employed to
evaluate differences among groups formed either by respondents ’perceptions (e.g. García
et al., 2008; Algesheimer et al., 2005; Bagozzi and Dholakia, 2006; Belanche et al., 2019) or by
demographic characteristics such as gender or age (e.g. Hernández et al., 2011; Choi et al.,
2005), facilitating comparison between parameters.
Focusing on the moderating role of familiarity –that is, to distinguish between users with
high vs low levels of familiarity –the total sample was divided according to the arithmetic
mean of the moderating variable, with some cases ( ±0.5 standard deviation) eliminated
around this mean (García et al., 2008). Following this method, the first group consisted of 262
respondents who had a lower familiarity with robots; the second group comprised 277
participants who reported a higher level of familiarity. After generating an individual
structural solution for each group, a significant difference emerged between the groups at the
0.1 level in the relationship between subjective norms and intention to use (see Table III).
As expected, the influence of subjective norms on intention to use the robo-advisor increases
for users with a lower level of familiarity comp ared to users with a higher level of familiarity.
That is, when consumers lack familiarity with robots, their first-hand experience is low and thus
their decisions may be based on others ’opinions or information disseminated through mass
media (Bhattacherjee, 2001). However, the influences of per ceived usability and attitude on
intention to use are not altere d by familiarity. Therefore, H3is only partially supported.
In addition, as aforementioned, this study controlled for potential differences in the
influence of the antecedents of intention to use robo-advisors due to sociodemographic
characteristics such as age or gender (Sun and Zhang, 2006). According to Sun and Zhang
(2006), these personal characteristics may be relevant moderating factors that could
contribute to a better understanding of the acceptance of a new technology. To assess the
possible moderating role of gender, a second multisample analysis was performed,
comparing between males ( n¼329) and females ( n¼436). In this case, no significant
differences emerged between the groups (see Table IV). Therefore, the results suggest that
gender does not alter the influence of antecedents of intention to use, which implies that both
men and women tend to base their adoption decision on a similar basis.
Finally, to assess the moderating role of age, the same procedure was used to perform
another multisample analysis. The sample was divided into two groups: participants agedless than 35 ( n¼395) and those aged 35 years or more ( n¼370). The age of 35 was used
as a cutoff point as it represents the difference between the millennial generation (broadly
Estimated coefficients
Constraints Males Females df χ²difference Probability
Perceived usefulness →Intention to use 0.066 −0.053 1 0.002 0.964
Attitude →Intention to use 0.707* 0.851* 1 0.626 0.429
Subjective norms →Intention to use 0.231* 0.226* 1 0.382 0.536
Note: *Significant at po0.01Table IV.
Multisample analysis:genderEstimated coefficients
Constraints Low familiarity High familiarity df χ²difference Probability
Perceived usefulness →Intention to use −0.053 0.058 1 0.475 0.491
Attitude →Intention to use 0.805* 0.758* 1 0.169 0.681
Subjective norms →Intention to use 0.287* 0.124** 1 3.091 0.079
Notes: *,**Significant at po0.01 and po0.05, respectivelyTable III.
Multisample analysis:
familiarity with robots1420IMDS
119,7

=== Page 11 ===
understood as born after 1981) and previous generations (Bolton et al., 2013). However, the
results in Table V indicate that there is no significant difference between the groups. Again,
the empirical results indicate that age does not alter the influence of antecedents of intention
to use, meaning that that the determinants of adoption have a similar influence for both
younger and older customers.
5.2 Post hoc analysis
Previous studies have suggested that cultural differences may affect the formation of
consumer intentions (e.g. Belanche, Casaló and Guinalíu, 2015) –an aspect that is crucial in
online services that are being spread globally, as is the case for robo-advisors. The sample
comprised participants from three countries (i.e. Portugal, the UK and the USA), which involve
Latin and Anglo-Saxon countries, as well as American and European ones, in order to
evaluate whether the influence of antecedents of intention to use robo-advisors depends on the
participant ’sc u l t u r e .
To this end, and following previous studies that have evaluated path differences among
samples from different countries (e.g. Sultan et al., 2009), a final multisample analysis was
performed considering three groups: participants from Portugal ( n¼220), the UK ( n¼278)
and the USA ( n¼254). The results of this analysis, depicted in Table VI, reveal interesting
differences between countries. Specifically, even though the relationship between usefulness
and intention to use is not significant in any case, this influence is lower in Portugal than in the
UK ( χ2
d(1)¼4.200; po0.05) and the USA ( χ2
d(1)¼19.528; po0.01). In addition, this influence
is higher in the USA compared to the UK ( χ2
d(1)¼9.759; po0.01). Regarding the relationship
between attitude and intention to use, this influence is always significant and is significantly
higher for Portuguese users than for British ( χ2
d(1)¼2.901; po0.1) and American
users ( χ2
d(1)¼16.759; po0.01), as well for Americans compared to British customers
(χ2
d(1)¼13.885; po0.01). Finally, the influence of subjective norms on intention to use is
significantly lower in Portugal than in the USA ( χ2
d(1)¼14.748; po0.01) or the UK
(χ2
d(1)¼8.054; po0.01); this influence is significant in all cases. No difference arises in the
comparison between the USA and the UK for the influence of subjective norms. In spite of
these differences due to participants ’nationality, the parameters estimated for each country
provide consistent results with the model considering the whole sample, with attitude revealed
as the most relevant predictor of behavioral intentions, followed by subjective norms.
Estimated coefficients
Constraints Portugal UK USA
Perceived usefulness →Intention to use −0.178 −0.020 0.039
Attitude →Intention to use 0.849* 0.790* 0.823*
Subjective norms →Intention to use 0.118** 0.259* 0.259*
Notes: *,**Significant at po0.01 and po0.05, respectivelyTable VI.
Multisample
analysis: countryEstimated coefficients
Constraints Less than 35 years 35 Years or more dfχ²
difference Probability
Perceived usefulness →Intention to use 0.024 −0.047 1 0.165 0.684
Attitude →Intention to use 0.726* 0.869* 1 0.012 0.913
Subjective norms →Intention to use 0.297* 0.190* 1 1.523 0.217
Note: *Significant at po0.01Table V.
Multisample
analysis: age1421Artificial
Intelligence in
FinTech

=== Page 12 ===
6. Discussion
6.1 Conclusions
Among the advance of innovative FinTech, r obo-advisors are of particular interest
because of their differential features. Contra ry to other initiatives, robo-advisors rely on
AI systems; that is, automated platforms b ased on analytical intelligence that are
replacing human advisory serv ices. This service innovation needs to be understood under
the expansion of robotic and AI systems, wh ich are likely to gradually replace many
human jobs in the coming years (particularly mechanical, analytical, intuitive and
empathic tasks Huang and Rust, 2018). More p recisely, from a consumer perspective,
users need to adapt to new robotic service provid ers that play the social role traditionally
attributed to a human employee. Recent liter ature has highlighted that this advance
represents a disruptive innovation that com panies need to carefully understand and
integrate in order to achieve a successful t ransformation in the medium term (Singh et al.,
2017; Van Doorn et al., 2017). In this line, based on TAM, the contribution of the research
framework to previous lit erature on robo-advisors ’adoption is twofold. First, this study
identifies the key determinants of customers ’decision to adopt robo-advisor systems
focusing on a wide range of customers and cons idering both traditional antecedents (such
as those proposed in TAM Davis, 1989; i.e. atti tude, perceived usefulness, ease of use) as
well as social influences (i.e. subjective norms). Second, this study evaluates possible
differences in the adoption process depending on the customer ’s familiarity with robots (a
crucial aspect taking into account that finan cial robo-advisors represent a disrupting
service innovation) and sociodem ographic characteristics (i.e. age, gender, culture), which
may moderate the relationships propose d in the framework. The inclusion of these
moderating factors helps to better explain this phenomenon from a wider scope.
Regarding the first contribution –the identification of key determinants of customers ’
intention to use robo-advisors –the results suggest that attitude is the strongest predictor of
behavioral intention to use financial robo-advisors, followed by subjective norms. Therefore,
as proposed by Fishbein and Ajzen (1975), customers are not only motivated by their
favorable or unfavorable evaluation of the use of these services, but also consider the
expectations of others when making such usage decisions. This may be explained by the
fact that, in a new situation for which there is no obvious course of action –as is probably
the case when using financial robo-advisors –customers may need some basic social
confirmation and may seek information from sources around them to better interpret and
navigate it (Wei and Zhang, 2008). In turn, the influence of perceived usefulness on intention
is non-significant. This is consistent with previous literature, as the sample comprised
individuals that did not have direct previous experience with financial robo-advisors.
Previous studies have suggested that the influence of perceived usefulness on intention to
use is more consistent in post-acceptance stages (i.e. after several months using the system
Bhattacherjee, 2001; Casaló et al. , 2010). In addition, attitude is positively influenced by
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use, wherein the influence of the former is
greater. Again, this is consistent with previous literature suggesting that attitude plays a
central role in the adoption of a new technology-based service (Hernández et al., 2009), as in
the case of robo-advisors. On the one hand, literature has found that perceived usefulness
impacts attitude consistently in both pre-adoption and post-adoption stages; on the other
hand, the influence of perceived ease of use seems to become non-significant in later stagesof adoption (Davis et al. , 1989; Karahanna et al. , 1999; Bhattacherjee, 2001). Taking into
account that preliminary findings on the robo-advisor field have suggested usability as a
relevant factor for customers ( Jung, Dorner, Weinhardt and Pusmaz, 2018), the results of the
current study also advance this knowledge and support that not only perceived usefulness
but also perceived ease of use play a crucial role in shaping customers ’attitudes toward
robo-advisors in early stages of the adoption process.1422IMDS
119,7

=== Page 13 ===
Second, the study contributes to the literature by evaluating possible differences in the robo-
advisor adoption process. In this respect, familiarity is revealed as a key moderating variable to
understand the intention to use this specific type of service. Specifically, the influence of
subjective norms was found to be greater when participants have a lower familiarity with the
use of robots than when they have a high familiarity. This is also consistent with previous
findings, as consumers who are more familiar with interacting with robots have been shown to
have more direct and realistic first-hand experience (e.g. Fazio and Zanna, 1981). Thus, users
with higher familiarity will tend to value usefulness and personal attitudes to a greater extent,
instead of relying on subjective norms based on others ’opinions. In turn, when familiarity is
low, first-hand information is more limited, leading to consumers ’behavioral intentions toward
robo-advisors being based on others ’opinions to a greater extent, as previously proposed in the
literature (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000). In turn, age and gender do not moderate the influence of
antecedents of intention to use financial robo-advisors, suggesting that there is no technological
divide related to these demographic characteris tics. This finding is not surprising considering
that recent studies have found that these variables may not affect the adoption process of a
new technology when it is targeted to a wide population (e.g. Belanche, Casaló and
Pérez-Rueda, 2015). In the present case, anyone who will potentially make investments during
their life is a potential user of financial robo-advisors, as these systems are specifically designed
to simplify and democratize finance management (Sironi, 2016).
Finally, since the sample comprised participants from three different countries (Portugal,
the UK and the USA), this study also contributes to previous research on robo-advisor
adoption by considering the moderating role of culture on this adoption process. The results
suggest that there are relevant differences in the influence of antecedents of intention to use
depending on participants ’culture. In this respect, the influence of attitude seems to be greater
for Portuguese users. This may be explained by differences in Hofstedes ’(2018) cultural
dimensions; compared to the USA and the UK, in Portugal there is very high uncertainty
avoidance, as well as lower rates of individualism and masculinity. Following Hofstede ’s
(2018) description of cultural values, in cultures with higher uncertainty avoidance, attitude
may be a crucial predictor of intention because of individuals need to be secured when making
a decision involving uncertainty. In turn, the influence of usefulness is greater in the USA and
the UK than in Portugal. This may be explained by the fact that the USA and the UK arecountries with higher masculinity values, where people ’s motivations are more driven by
aspects such as achievement and success (Hofstede, 2018). Thus, previous literature has found
that in countries with higher masculine values, perceived usefulness (as a functional
aspect linked to perceptions of successful performance) determines consumer behavior to a
higher extent compared to in countries with more feminine values (Belanche, Casaló and
Guinalíu, 2015). Finally, in spite of the fact that the USA and the UK score higher in
individualism (Hofstede, 2018), the influence of subjective norms is greater in these countries
than in Portugal. This represents an interesting finding because it reveals that subjective
norms are crucial even in countries where individualistic or performance-based values are
dominant, in contrast to social values. Perhaps American and British customers perceive
others ’opinions about robo-advisors as a kind of opportunity or invitation to participate in a
competition to achieve greater value for their finances (i.e. convenience, profitability).
6.2 Implications for managers and customers
The successful introduction of robo-advisors in the context of AI and FinTech expansion
represents a challenging issue, but also a source of competitive advantage for many firms in
the finance sector (Park et al., 2016). On the one hand, consumers may be reluctant to switch
to an automated robo-advisor, because of its novel and particularly different features
(e.g. lack of human –employee supervision). On the other hand, the advantages of robo-
advisors have ensured that these systems are coming to manage a growing amount of1423Artificial
Intelligence in
FinTech

=== Page 14 ===
assets, revealing an opportunity to increase the market by spreading the service to a wider
public ( Jung, Dorner, Weinhardt and Pusmaz, 2018).
Our study provides managers with advice about the introduction of robo-advisors to a
wide spectrum of consumers. A relevant finding of the research is that basic demographic
variables do not alter the relationships within the proposed framework, which suggests that
robo-advisors could be targeted to users independently of their age and gender. However,
the strength of the influence of determinants of intention to use varies among participants
from different countries, which suggests that more precise strategies that could be targeted
to each market can be developed.
As the main finding, the study reveals that consumer attitudes toward these systems are
the key driver of the intention to use them; therefore, the design of an easy to use and useful
platform is fundamental to shape users ’favorable predisposition toward the use of robo-
advisors. In order to increase the number of robo-advisor users, financial companies must be
able to assuage customers ’doubts and enhance their perceptions of these systems. For this
purpose, informing customers about the benefits and profitability of using robo-advisors,
allowing them to interact with the robo-advisor platform (even if they do not invest any
money or the investment is very low) or including supporting conversational systems (e.g.
chatbots or digital assistants that simplify human –machine interactions and improve the
interface ’s interactivity SAP, 2018) could be of help. This is especially recommended for
countries with high levels of uncertainty avoidance (like Portugal in the present case)
because, in these countries, customers need to be secure when adopting an innovation that
involves uncertainty. That is, customers need to have a very positive opinion about financial
robo-advisors in order to decide to use them.
In turn, subjective norms also have a remark able impact on robo-advisor adoption. Both
interpersonal comments and mass media infor mation contribute to increasing consumers ’
intentions to start using robo-advisors. In this r egard, banks and other companies in the industry
should seek to enhance public opinion by providing information about the benefits of robo-
advisors by means of expert users and professional reports. Interestingly, the effect of subjective
norm is even greater in Anglo-Saxon countries (i.e. the UK and the USA), suggesting that even
putting extra effort into advertising, publicity or lobbying would be highly beneficial in these
countries to boost the social approval of robo-a dvisors for a higher adoption of such systems.
Finally, the results reveal that effects of the determinants of intention to use vary
depending on users ’familiarity with robotic and AI systems (Young et al. , 2009). As
theoretically expected (e.g. Venkatesh and Davis, 2000), others ’opinions (i.e. subjective
norms) have a greater impact on users with lower familiarity than on users with higher
familiarity, who already have their own perceptions about robo-advisors. This finding
suggests a twofold strategy to attract users: marketing campaigns could focus on
consumers who already have experience with robots following cross-selling practices (e.g.
agreements with robotic engineering faculties or associations, alliance with companies in the
AI and robot industry such as iRobot, etc.). Indeed, establishing an ongoing alliance with
robot developers would help finance firms to promote breakthrough innovations (Zheng and
Yang, 2015). Alternatively, and considering the relevance of subjective norms for users with
lower familiarity with robots, firms could address more familiar users to spread the message
to less familiar ones by means of social media campaigns or advertisements in which expert
users explain their favorable experiences with robo-advisors.
Turning to customers, it is strongly recommende dt h a tt h e yl o o kf o ri n f o r m a t i o n( e . g .r e p o r t s ,
news, etc.) that explain the characteristics (e.g. pr ofitability, advantages, disadvantages, etc.) of
financial robo-advisors. These customers a re encouraged to look for other customers ’opinions
and comments (e.g. on social media or on specialized publications on finance). Since it is difficultto develop expectations before consuming serv ices, the use of second-hand information from
others may be of help in forming realistic expectations about a given service (Casalo et al., 2015).1424IMDS
119,7

=== Page 15 ===
Therefore, testimony from peers may be useful in forming more precise expectations about
financial robo-advisors, reducing the perceived risk of using them.
As well, customers should interact with robo-advisor platforms directly in order to
evaluate their ease of use and usefulness via first-hand experience, which is considered as
more accurate than second-hand experience (Fazio and Zanna, 1981). In this way, their
beliefs about the robo-advisor and, subsequently, their positive or negative evaluation of
robo-advisors (attitude) will be more stable, helping them in their decision making. This is
especially recommended for customers with low levels of familiarity with robots, due to
their lack of first-hand experience with any kind of AI.
6.3 Further research and limitations
Despite these interesting contributions, this work has some limitations that suggest lines for
further research. First, this study focuses on behavioral intentions as the main dependent
variable. Previous research (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000) has confirmed that intention to use
and actual use are habitually highly correlated in the case of volitional behaviors, as per the
current study. Although the study of intention to use helps to understand initial stages of
the adoption process –afterwards, intentions are continuously refined and modified, which
impacts long-term continuance or discontinuance (e.g. Bhattacherjee, 2001) –a longitudinal
study that collects data about the actual use (Bagozzi, 2007) of financial robo-advisors
would be beneficial to further validate the findings of this research. Second, even though the
study analyzed the moderating role of some individual characteristics, other personality
traits (e.g. technology readiness, need for social interaction, etc.) may also moderate the
relationships of the proposed framework. Third, other variables, such us consumers ’
personal experience with human-assisted management of their finances, may also be
relevant in this context. Similarly, a customer ’s relationship and familiarity with the
company offering the financial robo-advisor –or other variables related to the company (e.g.
reputation) –may affect the adoption process; therefore, future research could focus on these
aspects. Finally, most participants in this research come from Portugal, the UK and the
USA; since the results show significant differences according to country, future studies
could incorporate other cultures (e.g. Asian, Latin American, Jewish, etc.) to obtain a global
understanding of the adoption of financial robo-advisors.
References
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2017), “Robots and jobs: evidence from US labor markets ”, available at:
https://voxeu.org/article/robots-and-jobs-evidence-us (accessed July 29, 2018).
Ajzen, I. (1991), “The theory of planned behavior ”,Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes , Vol. 50 No. 2, pp. 179-211.
Algesheimer, R., Dholakia, U.M. and Herrmann, A. (2005), “The social influence of brand communities:
evidence from European car clubs ”,Journal of Marketing , Vol. 59 No. 3, pp. 19-34.
Anderson, J. and Gerbing, D. (1988), “Structural equation modeling in practice: a review and
recommended two-step approach ”,Psychological Bulletin , Vol. 103 No. 3, pp. 411-423.
Bagozzi, R. (2007), “The legacy of the technology acceptance model and a proposal for a paradigm
shift ”,Journal of the Association for Information Systems , Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 244-254.
Bagozzi, R.P. and Dholakia, U.M. (2006), “Open source software user communities: a study of
participation in Linux user groups ”,Management Science , Vol. 52 No. 7, pp. 1099-1115.
Belanche, D., Casaló, L.V. and Flavián, C. (2012), “Understanding the influence of social information
sources on e-government adoption ”,Information Research , Vol. 17 No. 3, pp. 1-27.
Belanche, D., Casaló, L.V. and Guinalíu, M. (2015), “The effect of culture in forming e-loyalty intentions:
a cross-cultural analysis between Argentina and Spain ”,Business Research Quarterly , Vol. 18
No. 4, pp. 275-292.1425Artificial
Intelligence in
FinTech

=== Page 16 ===
Belanche, D., Casaló, L.V. and Pérez-Rueda, A. (2015), “Determinants of multi-service smartcard
success for smart cities development: a study based on citizens ’privacy and security
perceptions ”,Government Information Quarterly , Vol. 32 No. 2, pp. 154-163, available at:
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0740624X15000222
Belanche, D., Casaló, L.V., Flavián, C. and Guinalíu, M. (2019), “Reciprocity and commitment in online
travel communities ”,Industrial Management & Data Systems , Vol. 119 No. 2, pp. 397-411.
Bhattacherjee, A. (2000), “Acceptance of e-commerce services: the case of electronic brokerages ”,IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Systems and Humans , Vol. 30 No. 4, pp. 411-420.
Bhattacherjee, A. (2001), “Understanding information systems continuance: an expectation-
confirmation model ”,MIS Quarterly , Vol. 25 No. 3, pp. 351-370.
Bolton, R.N., Parasuraman, A., Hoefnagels, A., Migchels, N., Kabadayi, S., Gruber, T., Loureiro, Y.K.
and Solnet, D. (2013), “Understanding generation Y and their use of social media: a review and
research agenda ”,Journal of Service Management , Vol. 24 No. 3, pp. 245-267.
Casaló, L.V., Flavián, C. and Guinalíu, M. (2008), “The role of perceived usability, reputation,
satisfaction and consumer familiarity on the website loyalty formation process ”,Computers in
Human Behavior , Vol. 24 No. 2, pp. 325-345.
Casaló, L.V., Flavián, C. and Guinalíu, M. (2010), “Antecedents and consequences of consumer
participation in on-line communities: the case of the travel sector ”,International Journal of
Electronic Commerce , Vol. 15 No. 2, pp. 137-167.
Casalo, L.V., Flavian, C., Guinaliu, M. and Ekinci, Y. (2015), “Do online hotel rating schemes influence
booking behaviors? ”,International Journal of Hospitality Management , Vol. 49, pp. 28-36.
Castañeda, J.A., Muñoz-Leiva, F. and Luque, T. (2007), “Web acceptance model (WAM): moderating
effects of user experience ”,Information & Management , Vol. 44 No. 4, pp. 384-396.
Choi, K.S., Lee, H., Kim, C. and Lee, S. (2005), “The service quality dimensions and patient satisfaction
relationships in South Korea: comparisons across gender, age and types of service ”,Journal of
Services Marketing , Vol. 19 No. 3, pp. 140-149.
Davis, F. (1989), “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information
technology ”,MIS Quarterly , Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 319-340.
Davis, F., Bagozzi, R. and Warshaw, P. (1989), “User acceptance of computer technology: a comparison
of two theoretical models ”,Management Science , Vol. 35 No. 8, pp. 982-1003.
Faloon, M. and Scherer, B. (2017), “Individualization of robo-advice ”,The Journal of Wealth
Management , Vol. 20 No. 1, pp. 30-36.
Faubion, B. (2016), “Effect of automated advising platforms on the financial advising market ”,
bachelor ’s thesis, Sam M. Walton College of Business, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR,
available at: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/72841372.pdf (accessed August 8, 2018).
Fazio, R.H. and Zanna, M.P. (1981), “Direct experience and attitude –behavior consistency ”,i nB e r k o w i t z ,L .
(Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , Vol. 6, Academic Press, New York, NY, pp. 161-202.
Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. (1975), Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behavior: An Introduction to Theory
and Research. , Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Flavián, C., Guinalíu, M. and Gurrea, R. (2006), “The role played by perceived usability, satisfaction and
consumer trust on website loyalty ”,Information & Management , Vol. 43 No. 1, pp. 1-14.
Fornell, C. and Larcker, D. (1981), “Structural equation models with unobserved variables and
measurement error ”,Journal of Marketing Research , Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 39-50.
García, N., Sanzo, M.J. and Trespalacios, J.A. (2008), “Can a good organizational climate compensate for
a lack of top management commitment to new product development? ”,Journal of Business
Research , Vol. 61 No. 2, pp. 118-131.
Glaser, F., Iliewa, Z., Jung, D. and Weber, M. (2019), “Towards designing robo-advisors for
unexperienced investors with experience sampling of time-series data ”, in Davis, F., Riedl, R.,
vom Brocke, J., Léger, P.M. and Randolph, A. (Eds), Information Systems and Neuroscience.
Lecture Notes in Information Systems and Organisation , Vol. 29, Springer, Cham, pp. 133-138.1426IMDS
119,7

=== Page 17 ===
Grewal, D., Roggeveen, A.L. and Nordfält, J. (2017), “The future of retailing ”,Journal of Retailing ,
Vol. 93 No. 1, pp. 1-6.
Han, S. and Yang, H. (2018), “Understanding adoption of intelligent personal assistants: a parasocial
relationship perspective ”,Industrial Management & Data Systems , Vol. 118 No. 3, pp. 618-636.
Heinrich, P. and Schwabe, G. (2018), “Facilitating informed decision-making in financial service
encounters ”,Business & Information Systems Engineering , Vol. 60 No. 4, pp. 317-329.
Hernández, B., Jiménez, J. and Martín, M.J. (2009), “Adoption vs. acceptance of e-commerce: two
different decisions ”,European Journal of Marketing , Vol. 43 Nos 9/10, pp. 1232-1245.
Hernández, B., Jiménez, J. and Martín, M.J. (2011), “Age, gender and income: do they really moderate
online shopping behaviour? ”,Online Information Review , Vol. 35 No. 1, pp. 113-133.
Hess, T.M. (1994), “Social cognition in adulthood: aging-related changes in knowledge and processing
mechanisms ”,Development Review , Vol. 14 No. 4, pp. 373-412.
Hofstede, G. (2018), “Hofstede insights. Compare countries ”, available at: www.hofstede-insights.com/
product/compare-countries/ (accessed August 26, 2018).
Hooper, D., Coughlan, J. and Mullen, M. (2008), “Structural equation modelling: guidelines for
determining model fit ”,Electronic Journal of Business Research Methods , Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 53-60.
Huang, M.H. and Rust, R.T. (2018), “Artificial intelligence in service ”,Journal of Service Research ,
Vol. 21 No. 2, pp. 155-172.
Illum, S.F., Ivanov, S.H. and Liang, Y. (2010), “Using virtual communities in tourism research ”,Tourism
Management , Vol. 31 No. 3, pp. 335-340.
International Federation of Robotics (2017), “Executive summary world robotics 2017 service robots ”,
available at: https://ifr.org/free-downloads/ (accessed March 29, 2018).
Ji, M. (2017), “Are robots good fiduciaries? Regulating robo-advisors under the investment advisers act
of 1940 ”,Columbia Law Review , Vol. 117 No. 6, pp. 1543-1583.
Jöreskog, K. (1971), “Statistical analysis of sets of congeneric tests ”,Psychometrika , Vol. 36 No. 2,
pp. 109-133.
Jöreskog, K. and Sörbom, D. (1993), LISREL 8: Structural Equation Modeling with the SIMPLIS
Command Language , Scientific Software International, Chicago, IL.
Jung, D., Dorner, V., Glaser, F. and Morana, S. (2018), “Robo-advisory ”,Business & Information Systems
Engineering , Vol. 60 No. 1, pp. 81-86.
Jung, D., Dorner, V., Weinhardt, C. and Pusmaz, H. (2018), “Designing a robo-advisor for risk-averse,
low-budget consumers ”,Electronic Markets , Vol. 28 No. 3, pp. 367-380.
Karahanna, E., Straub, D.W. and Chervany, N.L. (1999), “Information technology adoption across time:
a cross-sectional comparison of pre-adoption and post-adoption beliefs ”,MIS Quarterly , Vol. 23
No. 2, pp. 183-213.
Laukkanen, T. and Pasanen, M. (2008), “Mobile banking innovators and early adopters: how they differ
from other online users? ”,Journal of Financial Services Marketing , Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 86-94.
Lichtenstein, D.R., Netemeyer, R.G. and Burton, S. (1990), “Distinguishing coupon proneness from value
consciousness: an acquisition –transaction utility theory perspective ”,Journal of Marketing ,
Vol. 54 No. 3, pp. 54-67.
MacKenzie, S.B., Lutz, R.J. and Belch, G.E. (1986), “The role of attitude toward the ad as a mediator of
advertising effectiveness: a test of competing explanations ”,Journal of Marketing Research ,
Vol. 23 No. 2, pp. 130-143.
Mäenpää, K., Kale, S.H., Kuusela, H. and Mesiranta, N. (2008), “Consumer perceptions of Internet
banking in Finland: the moderating role of familiarity ”,Journal of Retailing and Consumer
Services , Vol. 15 No. 4, pp. 266-276.
Marinova, D., de Ruyter, K., Huang, M.H., Meuter, M.L. and Challagalla, G. (2017), “Getting smart:
learning from technology-empowered frontline interactions ”,Journal of Service Research , Vol. 20
No. 1, pp. 29-42.1427Artificial
Intelligence in
FinTech

=== Page 18 ===
Mathieson, K. (1991), “Predicting user intentions: comparing the technology acceptance model with the
theory of planned behavior ”,Information System Research , Vol. 2 No. 3, pp. 173-239.
Park, J.Y., Ryu, J.P. and Shin, H.J. (2016), “Robo advisors for portfolio management ”,Advanced Science
and Technology Letters , Vol. 141, pp. 104-108.
Rosman, C. (2018), “Mad about Erica: why a million people use bank of America ’s chatbot ”, American
Banker, New York, NY, available at: www.americanbanker.com/news/mad-about-erica-why-a-million-people-use-bank-of-americas-chatbot (accessed August 8, 2018).
Ryu, H.S. (2018), “What makes users willing or hesitant to use Fintech?: the moderating effect of user
type ”,Industrial Management & Data Systems , Vol. 118 No. 3, pp. 541-569.
SAP (2018), “Trend report 2018. Emerging technology trends ”, available at: www.sap.com/
documents/2018/04/02112563-007d-0010-87a3-c30de2ffd8ff.html (accessed February 24, 2019).
Singh, J., Brady, M., Arnold, T. and Brown, T. (2017), “The emergent field of organizational frontlines ”,
Journal of Service Research , Vol. 20 No. 1, pp. 3-11.
Sironi, P. (2016), FinTech Innovation: From Robo-Advisors to Goal Based Investing and Gamification ,
Wiley, Chichester, available at: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119227205
Statista (2019), “Robo-advisors worldwide report ”, available at: www.statista.com/outlook/337/100/
robo-advisors/worldwide (accessed February 12, 2019).
Steenkamp, J.B. and Geyskens, I. (2006), “How country characteristics affect the perceived value of a
website ”,Journal of Marketing , Vol. 70 No. 3, pp. 136-150.
Steenkamp, J.B. and Van Trijp, H.C.M. (1991), “The use of LISREL in validating marketing constructs ”,
International Journal of Research in Marketing , Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 283-299.
Sultan, F., Rohm, A.J. and Gao, T.T. (2009), “Factors influencing consumer acceptance of mobile
marketing: a two-country study of youth markets ”,Journal of Interactive Marketing , Vol. 23
No. 4, pp. 308-320.
Sun, H. and Zhang, P. (2006), “The role of moderating factors in user technology acceptance ”,
International Journal of Human –Computer Studies , Vol. 64 No. 2, pp. 53-78.
Taylor, S. and Todd, P.A. (1995), “Understanding information technology usage: a test of competing
models ”,Information Systems Research , Vol. 6 No. 2, pp. 144-176.
Van Doorn, J., Mende, M., Noble, S.M., Hulland, J., Ostrom, A.L., Grewal, D. and Petersen, J.A. (2017),
“Domo arigato Mr Roboto: emergence of automated social presence in organizational
frontlines and customers ’
service experiences ”,Journal of Service Research , Vol. 20 No. 1,
pp. 43-58.
Venkatesh, V. and Davis, F. (2000), “A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model: four
longitudinal field studies ”,Management Science , Vol. 46 No. 2, pp. 186-204.
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M., Davis, G. and Davis, F. (2003), “User acceptance of information technology:
toward a unified view ”,MIS Quarterly , Vol. 27 No. 3, pp. 425-478.
Wei, L. and Zhang, M. (2008), “The impact of internet knowledge on college students ’intention to
continue to use the internet ”,Information Research , Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 1-21, available at: http://
InformationR.net/ir/13 –3/paper348.html (accessed September 6, 2012).
Young, J.E., Hawkins, R., Sharlin, E. and Igarashi, T. (2009), “Toward acceptable domestic robots:
applying insights from social psychology ”,International Journal of Social Robotics , Vol. 1 No. 1,
pp. 95-108.
Zaichkowsky, J.L. (1985), “Measuring the involvement construct ”,Journal of Consumer Research ,
Vol. 12 No. 3, pp. 341-352.
Zheng, Y. and Yang, H. (2015), “Does familiarity foster innovation? The impact of alliance partner
repeatedness on breakthrough innovations ”,Journal of Management Studies , Vol. 52 No. 2,
pp. 213-230.1428IMDS
119,7

=== Page 19 ===
Appendix
About the authors
Daniel Belanche holds a PhD in Business Administration and is Assistant Professor of Marketing at
the University of Zaragoza, Spain. His research interests include e-commerce and e-government, socialidentities, emotions and purchase decision processes. His studies have been published in internationaljournals such as Journal of Interactive Marketing ,Journal of Services Management, Government
Information Quarterly ,Information & Management ,Industrial Management & Data Systems or
Psychology & Marketing .
Luis V. Casaló holds a PhD in Business Administration and is Associate Professor of Marketing at
the University of Zaragoza, Spain. His research interests include consumer behavior, social networks,e-commerce and e-government. His studies have been published in international journals such asInternational Journal of Electronic Commerce ,Journal of Business Research ,Information &
Management ,Industrial Management & Data Systems ,International Journal of Information
Management ,Internet Research orTourism Management .
Carlos Flavián holds a PhD in Business Administration and is a Professor of Marketing at the
University of Zaragoza, Spain. His research has been published in several academic journals,Perceived ease of use
EASE_OF_USE1 Learning to use robo-advisors would be easy for meEASE_OF_USE2 I would find it easy to manage investments using robo-advisorsEASE_OF_USE3 It would be easy for me to become skillful at using robo-advisors
EASE_OF_USE4 I would find robo-advisors easy to use
Perceived usefulness
USEFUL1 Using robo-advisors would improve my performance in managing investments
USEFUL2 Using robo-advisors would improve my productivity in managing investments
USEFUL3 Using robo-advisors would enhance my effectiveness in managing investmentsUSEFUL4 I would find robo-advisors useful in managing investments
Interpersonal influence
INT_INF1 My peers/colleagues/friends think that I should use robo-advisors for managing
investments
INT_INF2 People I know think that using robo-advisors is a good ideaINT_INF3 People I know could influence me to try out robo-advisors for managing investments
External influence
EXT_INF1 I have read/seen news reports that using robo-advisors is a good way of managing
investments
EXT_INF2 The popular press depicts a positive sentiment related to using robo-advisorsEXT_INF3 Mass media reports influence me to try out robo-advisors for managing investments
Attitude
ATT1 Using robo-advisors for managing investments seems like a good ideaATT2 I like the idea of using robo-advisors for managing personal investmentsATT3 Using robo-advisors for implementing my investments seems like a wise idea
Intention to use
INT_USE1 I intend to use robo-advisors for managing investmentsINT_USE2 Using robo-advisors for managing investments is something I would doINT_USE3 My intention is to use robo-advisors rather than any human financial advisor
Familiarity with the use of robots
FAM1 I have worked with or studied robotic artificial intelligenceFAM2 Throughout my life I have had experience interacting with robotsFAM3 I am familiar with robots or robot contents (texts, audiovisuals, etc.)
Table AI.
Measurement scales1429Artificial
Intelligence in
FinTech

=== Page 20 ===
specialized in marketing ( Journal of Interactive Marketing ,Journal of Business Research ,European
Journal of Marketing ,Psychology & Marketing , etc.), tourism ( Tourism Management ,International
Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management ,International Journal of Hospitality Management ,
etc.) and new technologies ( Industrial Management & Data Systems ,Information & Management,
Internet Research, Computers in Human Behavior ,International Journal of Electronic Commerce , etc.).
He is the editor of the Spanish Journal of Marketing-ESIC and Associate Editor of the Services
Industries Journal . Carlos Flavián is the corresponding author and can be contacted at:
cflavian@unizar.es
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com1430IMDS
119,7
